
















AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE CITY OF JACKSONVILLE AND THE
     FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS

OCTOBER 1, 2011 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2014












AGREEMENT

BETWEEN


CITY OF JACKSONVILLE


AND


FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE


POLICE OFFICERS THROUGH SERGEANTS


OCTOBER 1, 2011 - SEPTEMBER 30, 2014



TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE	PAGE
AGREEMENT	1
ARTICLE 1: F.O.P. RECOGNITION	3
ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF	5
ARTICLE 3: F.O.P. ACTIVITIES	7
ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY	9
ARTICLE 5: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS	11
ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS	13
ARTICLE 7: BULLETIN BOARDS	15
ARTICLE 8: WORK RULES	17
ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE	19
ARTICLE 10: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE	23
ARTICLE 11: BILL OF RIGHTS	25
ARTICLE 12: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
POLICY AND PROCEDURES	27
ARTICLE 13: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION	39
ARTICLE 14: FILES	41
ARTICLE 15: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN E	43
ARTICLE 16: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN P	47
ARTICLE 17: USE OF LEAVE	50
ARTICLE 18: BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE	55
ARTICLE 19: LEAVE DONATION	57
ARTICLE 20: MILITARY LEAVE	59
ARTICLE 21: HOLIDAYS	61
ARTICLE 22: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT	63
ARTICLE 23: WAGES	68
ARTICLE 24: COMPENSATION FOR COURT RELATED MATTERS	74
ARTICLE 25: FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM	79
ARTICLE 26: SAFETY AND HEALTH	81
ARTICLE 27: PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING	83
ARTICLE 28: INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUTY	85
ARTICLE 29: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS	87
ARTICLE 30: LIFE INSURANCE	92
ARTICLE 31: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT	94
ARTICLE 32: SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT	96
ARTICLE 33: PROMOTIONS	98
ARTICLE 34:PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY ..............................100ARTICLE 35:MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ...........................106ARTICLE 36:SEVERABILITY ........................................108ARTICLE 37:RESIDUAL RIGHTS .....................................110ARTICLE 38:ENTIRE AGREEMENT ...................................112SCHEDULE A...................................................114SCHEDULE B...................................................116
SCHEDULE C	119
SCHEDULE D	122
SCHEDULE E	124
APPENDIX A	127
APPENDIX A: PREAMBLE	129
ARTICLE A-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE	131
ARTICLE A-2: GRIEVANCES AND SEPARATIONS	133
ARTICLE A-3: HOLIDAYS	135
ARTICLE A-4: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT	137
ARTICLE A-5: WAGES	139
ARTICLE A-6: INJURY IN-LINE-OF-DUTY	141
ARTICLE A-7: LIFE INSURANCE	143
ARTICLE A-8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS	145
ARTICLE A-9: MILITARY LEAVE	147
ARTICLE A-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS	149
ARTICLE A-11: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE	151
ARTICLE A-12: ALCOHOL & DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES	153
ARTICLE A-13: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED	157
ARTICLE A-14: LEAVE	159
APPENDIX B: JUDICIAL OFFICERS	161
ARTICLE B-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE	163
ARTICLE B-2: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE	165
ARTICLE B-3: USE OF LEAVE	167
ARTICLE B-4: MILITARY LEAVE	171
ARTICLE B-5: HOLIDAYS	173
ARTICLE B-6: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT	175
ARTICLE B-7: WAGES	177
ARTICLE B-8: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS	179
ARTICLE B-9: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT	181
ARTICLE B-10: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE
POLICY AND PROCEDURES	183
ARTICLE B-11: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED	197
I N D E X	199

AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is entered into between the City of Jacksonville, hereinafter referred to as the Employer1 and The Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 of the Fraternal Order of Police, hereinafter referred to as the F.O.P. It is the intent and purpose of this Agreement to assure sound and mutually beneficial working and economic relationships between the parties hereto, to provide an orderly and peaceful means of resolving any misunderstandings or differences which may arise and to set forth herein a basic and full agreement between the parties concerning rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of employment. There are and shall be no individual arrangements or agreements covering any part or all of this Agreement contrary to the terms herein provided. Either party hereto shall be entitled to require specific performance of the provisions of this Agreement. It is mutually understood and declared to be the public policy of the Employer and the F.O.P. to promote harmonious and cooperative relationships between the Employer and its employees, and to protect the public by assuring, at all times, the orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of government.


































    1 The "Employer" means the Office of the Sheriff or the City of Jacksonville as the context may require.



Notes:

ARTICLE 1: F.O.P. RECOGNITION
1.1 Pursuant to and in accordance with all applicable provisions of Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, the Employer recognizes the F.O.P. as the exclusive collective bargaining representative for those employees in the certified bargaining unit, defined by Certification 278 issued on November 18, 1997, and clarified on May 9, 2006, as all sworn Police Officers of the rank of sergeant and below (see attached Schedule A), including sworn Judicial Officers and full-time temporary sworn certified bailiffs for the purpose of bargaining collectively in the determination of the wages,  hours  and terms and conditions of employment of the public employees within the bargaining unit unless and until recognition of such bargaining representative is withdrawn by a vote of the majority of the employees represented.

"Employees" shall mean all employees who are employed by the City of Jacksonville whose classifications appear on the attached Schedule A.

Terms and conditions of employment for the full-time temporary sworn certified bailiffs referred to in this section are set forth in Appendix A of this Agreement and not in the provisions of the main agreement.

Terms and conditions of employment for the sworn Judicial Officers referred to in this section are set forth in Appendix C of this Agreement and not in the provisions of the main agreement.

1.2 It is further understood and agreed that the President or an  alternate of the Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 of the F.O.P. will be the official spokesman for the Fraternal Order of Police in any matter between the F.O.P. and the Employer. The alternate shall be selected from one of the officers listed below:

Business AgentFirst Vice PresidentSecond Vice PresidentSecretaryMember of Board of DirectorsFlorida State Lodge representative (with letter of authorization to represent Jacksonville Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30)
1.3 Any alternate designated by the President shall be designated in writing, including the period of time covered by such designation. A written list of the accredited officers and representatives of the F.O.P. shall be furnished to the Sheriff and the City's Director of Employee Services immediately after their designation and the Sheriff and the City's Director of Employee Services shall be notified of any changes of said representatives within five
(5) days.




Notes:

ARTICLE 2: F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF
2.1 Upon receipt of a written authorization from an employee covered by this Agreement, the Employer will deduct from the employee's pay the amount owed to the F.O.P. by such employee for dues. There will be twenty-six (26) deductions per year. The Employer will remit such sums to the F.O.P. no later than the tenth (10th) day of the month following such deductions. The F.O.P. will certify any changes in the membership dues rate to the Employer in writing over the signature of the authorized officer or officers of the F.O.P. at least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of such change. The Employer's remittance will be deemed correct if the F.O.P. does not notify the Employer in writing within two (2) weeks of its receipt.

2.2 The F.O.P. will indemnify, defend, and hold the Employer harmless against any claim made and against any suit instituted against the Employer on account of any check off of F.O.P. dues.

2.3 An employee may revoke his/her authorization for deduction of dues, provided the employee gives thirty (30) days notice to the F.O.P. and the Employer by registered or certified mail. The Employer will not discontinue dues deduction from any employee prior to authorization of the F.O.P. or the employee. The Employer will not discontinue F.O.P. dues deduction simply because an employee has changed from one F.O.P. bargaining unit to another F.O.P. bargaining unit.

2.4 No dues deduction shall be made from the pay of an employee for any payroll period in which the employee's net earnings for that payroll period are less than the amount of dues to be checked off. "Net earnings" shall mean "net" after required deduction of federal taxes, Social Security, Pensions, Credit Union, and Health and Life Insurance premiums.

2.5 Should an employee's pay be insufficient to make all the deductions he/she has authorized, deductions will be taken in the following order:

A. All legally required deductions will be deducted from the employee's pay check. Legally required deductions include but are not limited to deductions for taxes, court ordered deductions and
F.O.P. dues deductions when the employee has authorized dues deductions.

B. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for City sponsored plans or activities.

C. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for other F.O.P. sponsored plans or activities that have been authorized by the employee. Provided that if any employee requests in writing to change the priority of his/her payroll deductions and replace an
F.O.P. deduction with a non-F.O.P. deduction, the written request of the employee will govern.

D. If any remaining payroll deduction slots are available on the employee's paycheck, the slots will be used for any other deductions for plans or activities that have been authorized by the employee.

2.6 In accordance with Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, Public Employees shall have the right to form, join and participate in or refrain from forming, joining and/or participating in any employee organization of their own choosing. They shall have the right to be represented by any employee organization of their choosing to negotiate collectively through a certified bargaining agent with the Employer in the determination of the terms and conditions of their employment.


ARTICLE 3: F.O.P. ACTIVITIES
3.1 Employees shall have the right to join the F.O.P., to engage in lawful concerted activities for the purpose of  collective  negotiation  or bargaining or other mutual aid and protection, to  express  or communicate any view, grievance, complaint or opinion, within  the bounds of good taste, related to the conditions  or  compensation  of public employment or its betterment, all free from any restraint, coercion, discriminations or reprisal. There shall not be restraint, discrimination or reprisal against any employee because of that employee's membership or lack of membership in the F.O.P. or by virtue of his/her holding office or not holding office in the F.O.P. The Employer and the F.O.P. shall apply this provision to all employees.
3 .2	A.	On Duty Solicitation by F.O.P.

Solicitation of any kind by the F.O.P., including the solicitation of grievances, membership, and the collection of F.O.P. monies, shall not be engaged in during working hours.
B. F.O.P. Meetings

No F.O.P. meeting shall be held on Employer time.

C. On Duty F.O.P. Presentations

The President of the F.O.P. or the designated representative may address any assembly or personnel of the Sheriff's Office at their regular roll call, at each in-service training and at each recruit class at the police academy for a period of time agreed upon by the
F.O.P. and the Office of the Sheriff.

D. On Duty Solicitation Prohibited

Employees will not be subjected to solicitation for monies or membership by outside groups (including insurance companies or charity groups) while on duty, including roll call.
3.3     The Employer will furnish a bank of three thousand (3000) hours for use as
F.O.P. Pool Time. This time shall be used for F.O.P. activities by  any member of the  F.O.P. Approval  of such time shall  be authorized by either the F.O.P. President, First Vice-President, Second Vice-President, or Secretary. Time charged will be the actual time used. The  F.O.P. may rollover not more than 500 unused hours to a subsequent year. When the
F.O.P. requests time off under these provisions, the employee that is to be off shall electronically submit the request to the Office of the Sheriff for approval. Such leave request must be in accordance with Article 17.2(C)(1)(2) of this contract.





Notes:

ARTICLE 4: MANAGEMENT SECURITY
4.1 The F.O.P. and its officers, representatives and members agree that during the life of this Agreement, they shall not instigate, promote, sponsor, engage in or condone any strike, slow down, concerted  stoppage  of work, intentional interruption of Employer operations, or similar activities during the terms of this Agreement. The consideration for such provision is the right to a resolution of disputed questions. Management has the right to discharge or otherwise discipline any or all employees who violate the provisions of this paragraph. The only questions that may be raised in any proceeding, grievance, judicial or otherwise, contesting such action is whether the provision prohibiting strikes, slowdowns, concerted stoppage of work, intentional interruptions of Employer operations or similar activities was violated by the employee to be discharged or otherwise disciplined.

4.2 A. The F.O.P., its representatives, members, or any persons acting on their behalf, agree that the following "other unlawful acts"  as defined in Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, are expressly prohibited:

(1) Soliciting employees during the working hours of any employee who is involved in the solicitation.

(2) Distributing literature during working hours in areas where the actual work of employees is performed, such as offices, warehouses, schools, police stations, fire stations, and any similar public installation. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the distribution of literature during the employee's lunch or in such areas not specifically devoted to the performance of the employee's official duties.

(3) Instigating or advocating support, in any positive manner, for an employee organization's activities from high school or grade school students during classroom time.

B. The circuit courts of this state shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section by injunction and contempt proceedings if necessary. An employee who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this section may be discharged or otherwise disciplined by the Employer notwithstanding further provisions of any collective bargaining agreement.

C. No employee organization shall directly or indirectly pay any fines or penalties assessed against individuals pursuant to the provisions of this article.

4.3 The Employer and the F.O.P. agree that the basic intent of this Agreement is to provide a fair day's work in return for a fair day's pay and to provide conditions of employment suitable to maintaining a  competent  work force. The Employer and the F.O.P. affirm their joint opposition to any discriminatory practices in connection with employment, promotion, training, or assignment, remembering that the public interest requires the full utilization of employees' skill and ability without regard to race, color, creed, national origin, marital status, or gender.


ARTICLE 5: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
5.1 It is the right of the Employer to determine unilaterally the purpose of each of its constituent agencies, set standards of service to be offered to the public, and exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations, including the right to subcontract. It is also the right of the Employer to direct its employees, take disciplinary action for proper cause, and relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons by seniority provided, however, that the exercise of such rights shall not preclude employees or their representatives from raising grievances, should decision on the above matters have the practical consequences of violating the terms and conditions of this collective bargaining agreement.

5.2 Whenever it is determined that Civil Emergency conditions exist, including riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes, or when such conditions can reasonably be determined to be imminent, excluding the normal operational requirements of major civic/sporting events  such as the Super Bowl, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by the Mayor and/or Sheriff during the time of the declared emergency provided that wage rates and monetary fringe benefits shall not be suspended.

5.3 No provision of this Agreement shall affect the City of Jacksonville's right and ability to classify employees as exempt from coverage by the Fair Labor Standards Act.



Notes:

ARTICLE 6: SPECIAL MEETINGS
The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to meet and confer on matters of mutual interest upon the written request of either party. The written request shall state the matter or matters to be discussed and the reason(s) for requesting the meeting. Discussion shall be limited to matters set forth in the request or other subjects mutually agreed to, but it is understood that these special meetings shall not be used to renegotiate this Agreement. Such special meetings shall be held within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the written request and at a time and place mutually agreeable to the parties. The F.O.P. shall have the right, at these special meetings to recommend to the Employer corrections to any inequities known to the F.O.P.



Notes:

ARTICLE 7: BULLETIN BOARDS
7.1 The F.O.P. shall be provided partial use of suitable bulletin boards, including at least one (1) in each division so designated by the Employer. The F.O.P. may if it so desires, provide a bulletin board, of standard size, for its own exclusive use in keeping with the decor of the above locations and with the approval of the Employer. In addition, the F.O.P. will be provided with centralized electronic posting ("electronic bulletin board") within the JSO system, for the same purpose.

7.2 The F.O.P. agrees that it shall use space on bulletin boards provided for in Section 7.1 above only for the following purposes:

Notices of F.O.P. meetingsElections of F.O.P. OfficersReports of F.O.P. committeesRulings and policies of the F.O.P.Recreational and social affairs of the F.O.P.Notices by public bodies
7.3 Before they are posted, copies of all material, notices, or announcements shall be submitted to the Employer.

7.4 No material, notices, or announcements shall be posted by the F.O.P. which contain anything political or controversial, or anything adversely reflecting upon the City of Jacksonville, its officials, managers, consultants, or agents, its independent agencies, its employees, or any other labor organization. Any proven violation of this section by the F.O.P. shall entitle the Employer to cancel immediately the provisions of this Section and to remove that bulletin board or the partial use thereof.

7.5 Notices or other information intended for the JSO electronic bulletin board shall be submitted on acceptable electronic medium to the JSO Chief of Personnel or designee for approval as to compliance with  7.2 before being posted. Notices or other information intended for the electronic bulletin board shall include a specific date on which the notice or information is to be automatically deleted from the electronic bulletin board. Approved materials will be posted electronically as soon as practicable.



Notes:

ARTICLE 8: WORK RULES
8.1 Reissuance of Conflicting Written Directives

On or before sixty (60) days after City Council approval of this Agreement, all written directives issued by the Office of the Sheriff that are in conflict with the terms and provisions of this Agreement shall be reissued so that no conflicts exist between written directives and the terms of this Agreement.

8.2 Notice and Scheduling of In-Service Training

It shall be the policy of the Office of the Sheriff whenever possible to give at least ten (10) working days' notice to employees scheduled for in- service training and to schedule employees on the midnight shift for such training after regular days off (RDO's) have been observed. It is recognized, however, that last minute changes are  often  necessitated due to unanticipated sickness, court subpoenas, family situations, etc., and such situations may reduce the notification time in some cases.

8.3 Emergency Situation Meals

In accordance with the Master Plan for Emergency Control of the Office of the Sheriff, employees who are required or ordered to work more than twelve (12) hours on a single tour of duty, due to a declared emergency, shall be furnished a hot meal on the second and each succeeding day, within the twelve (12) hour tour of duty. The Office of the Sheriff will make a reasonable effort to designate a safe and secure area near the emergency area for employees to consume this meal. On the first day of said emergency situation, a reasonable effort will be made to furnish affected employees a hot meal within their twelve (12) hour tour of duty.

8.4 The F.O.P. recognizes the value to the general public of allowing representatives from reserve/auxiliary or police associated organizations to ride in police vehicles with regular officers, and will cooperate with the Office of the Sheriff in promoting these programs. Other organizations or individuals may also be included in the plan, all for the benefit of law enforcement in general and for the Office of the Sheriff in particular.

Any Police Officer who does not wish to ride with a particular individual may decline to do so by notifying his/her commanding officer through an Inter-department Correspondence (P-004). The correspondence shall outline the specific reasons for not wanting to ride with  the individual which shall be forwarded to the JSO Chief of Personnel. This refusal is for information only and will not become part of  the  employee's personnel file or be used for purposes of disciplinary action and approval of such request will not be unduly withheld.

8.5 Members of the reserve unit or of other police departments shall not be allowed to perform any policing functions, unless such member is under the direct supervision and control of a certified Police Officer, nor will a member of such unit wear or display rank greater than that of a certified Police Officer with whom he/she is assigned to provided, however, that should the Office of the Sheriff declare an emergency to exist, the above provisions shall not apply for the duration of such emergency.

8.6 Transfers

It shall be the sole right of the Office of the Sheriff to transfer employees between any subsections of the organization, based upon operational needs. Employees shall be notified at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the transfer, except where the nature of a particular situation requires immediate reassignment.

8.7 Administrative Leave Without Loss of Pay

An employee may be placed on administrative leave without loss of pay for any reason deemed necessary by the Sheriff's Office.


ARTICLE 9: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
9.1 A grievance is defined as a dispute involving  the interpretation or application of this Agreement. Any grievance filed shall refer to the provision(s) of this Agreement alleged to have been violated, and shall adequately set forth the facts pertaining to the alleged violation and the remedy sought. Grievances challenging demotion with loss of pay, suspension with loss of pay or termination shall be filed at Step IV.

9.2 In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Article, the day of the act, event, or default from  which the  designated  period  of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday recognized by this Agreement, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday recognized by this Agreement.

9.3 Step 1:

Within ten (10) days of the occurrence or within ten (10) days after the employee could reasonably have known of the occurrence (whichever is later), the aggrieved employee shall reduce his/her grievance to writing, sign it, and present it to the Assistant Chief or his/her designee. The Assistant Chief or designee shall obtain the facts concerning the grievance and shall within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance conduct a meeting with the grievant and  the grievant's representative. The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Assistant Chief or designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 1 meeting.

9.4 Step 2:

If the grievance is not settled at the first step, the grievant may present the grievance to the Division Chief or his/her designee. The grievance must be presented to the  Division  Chief or his/her designee within  five  (5) days of receipt of the Step 1 response or, if a timely Step 1 response is not received, within five  (5) days from  the day the Step 1 response was due. The Division Chief or designee shall obtain the facts concerning  the grievance and shall within ten (10) days  of  receipt  of  the  grievance conduct a meeting  with  the  grievant  and  the  grievant's  representative. The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Division Chief or designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 2 meeting.

9.5 Step 3:

If the grievance is not settled at the second step, the grievant may present the grievance to the Director or his/her designee. The grievance must be presented to the Director or his/her designee within five (5) days of receipt of
the Step  2 response or, if a  timely Step 2 response is not received, within five (5) days from the day the Step 2 response was due. The Director or designee shall obtain the facts concerning the grievance and shall within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance conduct  a  meeting  with  the grievant and the grievant's representative. The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an F.O.P. representative. The Director or designee shall submit a written response  to  the  grievant  (with  a copy  to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 3 meeting.

9.6 Step 4:

If the grievance is not settled at the third step, the grievant may present the grievance to the Sheriff or his/her designee within five (5) days of receipt of the Step 3 response or, if a timely Step 3 response is not received, within five (5) days from the day the Step 3 response was due. Within ten (10) days of receipt of the grievance, the Sheriff or designee shall conduct a meeting with the grievant and the grievant's representative. The grievant may be accompanied at this meeting by an
F.O.P. representative. The Sheriff or designee shall submit a written response to the grievant (with a copy to the F.O.P.) not later than ten (10) days following the Step 4 meeting.

9.7 Arbitration:

A. If the grievance is not settled in accordance with this Article, the grievant or the F.O.P. (on behalf of the grievant) may request arbitration by providing a written request to the JSO Chief of Personnel (with a copy to the City's Director of Employee Services) not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the Step 4 response or, if a timely Step 4 response is not received, within thirty (30) days from the day the Step 4 response was due. The request shall set forth the specific provision(s) of the Agreement claimed to have been violated. If the request to arbitrate is not received by the JSO Chief of Personnel within the thirty (30) day limit, the Employer's Step 4 response shall be final and binding upon the grievant and the F.O.P.

B. In the event the grievant submits the request for arbitration without the financial support of the F.O.P., the grievant shall also submit written notice of his/her intent to pay all applicable costs of the arbitration. The grievant shall provide the Employer with written confirmation that sufficient funds are reserved in trust or escrow for the payment of arbitration services before the arbitration shall be allowed to proceed.

C. (1)   The F.O.P. and the Employer will mutually select a panel of five (5) qualified arbitrators to serve on a rotating list. The arbitrators selected must reside in Duval, Nassau, Clay, Baker, or St. Johns County. The rotation sequence shall be randomly determined by the F.O.P. and the Employer. The first arbitrator on the rotation sequence shall be assigned to the first grievance advanced to arbitration, with succeeding cases assigned to the remaining arbitrators seriatim. Once the rotation sequence has been  determined,  an  arbitrator cannot be assigned out of rotation unless mutually agreed by both parties. The parties may also mutually agree at any time to remove an arbitrator from the panel.

(2) Upon ratification of this Agreement, the F.O.P. and Employer shall identify two (2) existing arbitrators as having four-year terms and two (2) existing arbitrators as having two-year terms each, commencing from January 1, 2012. Upon completing the term limits of the two-year arbitrators, their successors shall each have four (4) year term limits, as will all other panelists thereafter. The parties agree that all arbitrators shall complete their panel assignments regardless of their term limits.

(3) The F.O.P. has the right within sixty (60) days following ratification of all F.O.P. bargaining agreements  to strike one
(1) of the panelists existing as of January 1, 2012. The parties shall then appoint the retired Fourth Judicial Circuit judge with AAA credentials into the slot vacated by the stricken panelist. This retired, but newly appointed arbitrator shall maintain the same term limit as that of the vacating panel arbitrator.

D. Once an arbitrator has been notified of his/her grievance assignment, the date for the arbitration hearing will be set as soon as practicable.

E. The parties shall rotate the administrative responsibilities for maintenance of the arbitration system on an annual basis.

F. All testimony given at the arbitration hearing shall be under oath.

G. Post-hearing briefs may be filed at the request of either party or the arbitrator.
H. The arbitrator shall render his/her decision within thirty (30) days of receipt of post-hearing briefs or of the close of the hearing, whichever is later.
I. The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction and authority to decide the grievance, as defined in this Article. However, the arbitrator shall have no authority to change, modify, amend, ignore, add  to, subtract from, or otherwise alter or supplement the Agreement or any part thereof or any amendment thereto.

J. The arbitrator shall consider only the specific issue(s) submitted to him/her in writing by the parties, and shall have no authority to consider or rule upon any matter which is stated in this Agreement not to be subject to arbitration, or which is not specifically covered by this Agreement.

K. The arbitrator's decision shall be exclusively based upon specific findings of fact and conclusions which shall be the predicate for any decision. In rendering any decision, the arbitrator shall only consider the written, oral, or documentary evidence submitted at the hearing.

L. The arbitrator may not issue declaratory or advisory opinions. The arbitrator shall be confined exclusively to the issue(s) presented to him/her, which issue(s) must be actual and existing.

M. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on  all parties, subject to those challenges permitted by law. However, the authority and responsibility of the Employer as provided by Chapter 447, Florida Statutes, and the Charter of the City of Jacksonville shall not be usurped in any manner unless specifically amended or modified by this Agreement.

N. Each party shall bear the cost of its own witnesses and representatives. The parties shall bear equally the cost of the arbitrator. Any party requesting a copy of the transcript of the arbitration hearing shall bear the cost of it. Any employee who acts independently of or in disregard of the position of the F.O.P. shall pay his/her own share of the arbitrator's cost and expense.

O. Election of Remedies: It is specifically and expressly understood that taking a grievance to arbitration constitutes an election of remedies and a waiver of any and all rights by the appealing party and all persons whom it represents. No employee  shall file an appeal under this agreement concerning any matter that he/she has previously appealed through the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

9.8 Any grievance not processed within the time limits provided in this Article shall be considered abandoned. Provided, however, the time limits set forth in this Article may be extended by joint agreement of the Employer and the F.O.P. (or the employee if appropriate) which is confirmed in writing. The parties may mutually agree in writing to waive any time limits or provisions of the grievance procedure.


ARTICLE 10: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE
10.1 All discipline taken against any bargaining unit employee shall be for proper cause. The procedure for dismissals, demotions, and suspensions shall be as outlined in the City of Jacksonville Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations and the Florida Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights, Section 112.532, Florida Statutes, as in effect upon signing of this Agreement unless modified in this Agreement. Should the Florida Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights be repealed (Section 112.532, Florida Statutes), said repeal will not affect or modify the provisions of this section.

10.2 Police recruits and entry level probationary Police Officers (as opposed to police sergeants on promotional probation) who are dismissed from employment shall have no right to a Civil Service Board hearing, or to appeal pursuant to this Agreement.

10.3 A.	Disciplinary Hearing Board

There shall be established a Sheriff's Disciplinary Hearing Board for the purpose of such hearings. Said Board shall be composed of five
(5) members, with two (2) members being selected by the administration, two (2) members being selected by the aggrieved officer; and the fifth member being selected by the other four (4) members. The Board members shall be law enforcement officers who are currently employed by JSO. No member of this Board shall be a relative of the aggrieved officer, as defined by  the  Civil Service Board rules. The hearing will be informal. Neither the aggrieved officer nor the Employer shall utilize an attorney for the presentation during the informal hearing proceedings. During the hearing, the aggrieved officer will be provided the opportunity to respond to the charges against him/her, and to tell his/her side of the story.  The aggrieved officer shall be permitted to provide a list of witnesses, and present evidence as part of a defense. Any member of the board may request, through the chairperson, to call upon the witnesses provided to give testimony germane to the events leading to the charges being levied. The Board will review the information presented during the informal hearing, and consider the JSO disciplinary standards, and then make a recommendation to the Sheriff about the level of discipline (if any) that it believes should be imposed in the case. The Board's decision will be advisory and not binding upon the Sheriff. If the decision of the Sheriff is unsatisfactory to the aggrieved officer, he/she may appeal this decision to the Civil Service Board within ten (10) days, or request arbitration within five (5) working days, as provided in Article
9.6  Step  IV.     It  is  agreed  that  the  convening  of  the  Sheriff's
Department Hearing Board shall be effectuated as expeditiously as possible following the charges being levied against the aggrieved

officer. Should the accused officer request to continue the hearing or delay its convening, then it is agreed that the officer waives his/her emoluments in exchange for the continuance  of  the hearing.

B. No suspension with loss of pay shall be implemented until any requested civil service or arbitration hearing has been held and an opinion rendered, except as provided for in Article 13. (This shall not apply to terminations).


ARTICLE 11: BILL OF RIGHTS
11.1 Whenever a law enforcement officer is under investigation and subject to interrogation or interview by members of his/her agency for any reason which could lead to disciplinary action, demotion, or dismissal, such interrogation shall be conducted under the following conditions:

A. The interrogation or interview shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a time when the law enforcement officer is on duty, unless the seriousness of the investigation is of such a degree that immediate action is required.

B. The interrogation or interview shall take place either at the Office of Internal Investigations or at the office of the police unit in which the incident allegedly occurred as designated by the  investigating officer or agency.

C. The law enforcement officer under investigation shall  be informed of the rank, name, and command of the officer in charge of the investigation, the interrogating officer, and all persons present during the interrogation or interview. All questions directed to the officer under interrogation or interview shall be asked by and through one (1) interrogator at any one (1) time.

D. The law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed in writing of the nature of the investigation prior to any interrogation or interview and the officer shall be informed of the name(s) of all complainants.

E. Interrogating sessions or interviews shall be for reasonable periods and shall be timed to allow for such personal necessities and rest periods as are reasonably necessary.

F. The law enforcement officer under investigation or interview shall not be subjected to offensive language or threatened with transfer, dismissal, or disciplinary action. No promise or reward shall be made as an inducement to answer any questions.

G. The entire interrogation or interview of a law enforcement officer, including the times of all recess periods, shall be recorded1, and there shall be no unrecorded questions or statements. A copy of the recorded interrogation or interview shall be provided upon request within 72 hours following the interrogation or interview.


1 "Recorded" shall mean any of the following: taking of statement by audio tape, videotape or by a court stenographer. However, the parties recognize that any officer conducting or observing an interview may take handwritten notes.

H. If the law enforcement officer under interrogation or interview is under arrest, or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation or interview, the officer shall be completely informed of all his/her rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation or interview.

I. At the request of any law enforcement officer under investigation, he/she shall have the right to be represented by counsel or any other representative of his/her choice, who shall be present at all times during such interrogation or interview.

J. The law enforcement officer who is a subject of a complaint or allegation shall be notified in writing by the Internal Investigation section of the disposition of the complaint or allegation upon the conclusion of the investigation. The investigation shall be concluded with the finding of sustained, not sustained, exonerated, or unfounded.

K. Any law enforcement officer who is the  subject of an investigation or interview has the right to review, along with his/her representative, the complaint or allegation and all written and/or recorded statements, regardless of form, made by the complainant(s) and witness(es) immediately prior to the beginning of the interview.

L. Whenever practical, any officer who is the subject of an investigation will be interviewed or interrogated after all  other known witnesses and complainants have been interviewed.


ARTICLE 12: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES
12.1 Mutual Agreement

A. The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug free workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for the protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The drug testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of society. Within the limitations, as outlined in this Article, employees found to have drug abuse problems will be encouraged to participate in an employee assistance program or a rehabilitation program.

B. It is further agreed that drug use has serious adverse effects upon users in the work force resulting in the loss of productivity, posing a threat to the workplace and to public safety and security. Maintaining a healthy and productive work force and safe working conditions free from the effects of drugs are the goals of both the Employer and the F.O.P. It is understood that drug use creates a variety of workplace problems, including increased injury  on  the job, increased absenteeism, and increased financial burdens on health and benefit programs. Criminal justice work requires and the safety of the public demands total mental and physical functioning of employees at all times. The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a responsibility in the interest of public safety to monitor the use and abuse by employees of controlled substances, and other drugs/medicines.
C. The Employer agrees to establish drug testing standards to balance the interests of the Employer, employees, and the welfare of the general public through a fair, confidential, and accurate drug testing program.
D. Employees who feel that they are abusing drugs are encouraged to contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming this problem. Normal agency benefits such as the Employee Assistance Program, appropriate leave, and the  group  medical plan are available to aid in the rehabilitation process. Staff assigned to the Employee Assistance Program will support employees in this process by providing referral to the appropriate agency suited to address the particular need of the employee.
E. The sale, purchase, transfer, use, or possession of illegal drugs, or drugs obtained illegally, is a violation of state and federal criminal statutes and, therefore, may result in termination. Use, or being

under the influence of alcohol while on duty or while driving a City vehicle presents a danger to the public, to the officer involved, and to other officers, and therefore, may result in termination.
F. In order to maintain the integrity of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office and to ensure public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office requires that all employees shall not:
(1) Abuse legal drugs;

(2) Sell, purchase, transfer, use, or possess illegal drugs, or drugs obtained illegally;
(3) Report for work and/or use Sheriff's Office equipment while under the influence of a legal drug taken as a medication to the extent that job performance would be affected.

12.2 Discussion

A. Drug screening provides management with a method  to assist in the detection of a possible problem so that it may be dealt with in the proper manner.

B. Drug screening of Sheriff's Office employees is a deterrent to their becoming involved with drugs. Additionally, it assists management in its efforts to detect drug problems within the Sheriff's Office. Drug screening provides an avenue for identifying a specific problem associated with drug use/abuse.

C. Personnel are cautioned that drug screening is not an absolute indicator of drug use. It is a single indicator that must be combined with other information before a final determination is made. The drug screening program is interwoven with established Sheriff's Office policy as it is affected by administrative procedures, internal investigations, Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights, criminal investigations, etc. The final determination (e.g. no action, disciplinary action, treatment or termination) is based on an accumulation of information and is consistent with the best interest of the Sheriff's Office and the employee.

12.3 Definitions

A. Controlled Substance - Any of the substances named in Schedules I through V of Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, and any "designer drugs" that may hereafter be proscribed by law and which are subject to manufacturing, distribution, preparation, dispensation, and administrative controls.


B. Employee Assistance Program - A confidential program designed to assist employees and their families with a multitude of problems that may affect the employee's work performance. Employees may volunteer for the program or be referred to it by their supervisors.


C. Confirmation Test - An additional analytical procedure used to identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite  in  a specimen. The confirmation test must be different in scientific principle from that of the initial test procedure. The confirmation method must be capable of providing requisite  specificity, sensitivity, and quantitative accuracy.

D. Illegal Drug - Any drug or substance, including controlled substances, the possession of which without a prescription is defined as a violation of state or federal statutes; or any prescription drug that was not prescribed to the affected employee by a person licensed to issue such prescription.

E. Legal Drugs - Any prescription medication or any over-the-counter medication that has some medicinal value/purpose and is being used by the person for whom it was prescribed.

F. Substance Abuse - The excessive or erratic ingestion, consumption, inhalation, or injection of any illegal drug or legally obtained drug or medicine not in prescribed amounts or at proper time intervals.

G. Use of Drugs - The injection, inhalation, ingestion, or consumption of any drug, whether prescription or non-prescription, or  any controlled substance as defined under Florida law.

H. "Under the Influence" - A condition in which employees are unable to appropriately perform their duties because of  the use of any drug, controlled substance, or alcohol. Employees shall be deemed to be under the influence if they are physically or mentally impaired and/or unable to perform their duties in an acceptable manner.

12.4 Responsibility for Reporting Legal Drug Use

A. Sheriff's Office employees using drugs or therapeutic treatments prescribed by a physician or other authorized health practitioner shall determine from the prescribing person whether the treatment prescribed has any effects which may interfere with  the performance of their duties. If the treatment prescribed has such effects, employees shall inform their supervisors of that fact.


B. Any Sheriff's Office employee using legal over-the-counter non- prescription drugs which in any way impair or affect his/her job performance is responsible for bringing this fact to the attention of his/her immediate supervisors on Form P-004. Information relating to the use of over-the-counter drugs can be removed at the request of the employee after it has been in the medical file for six (6) months, unless the usage of such medication is part of on-going treatment.

C. The supervisor of any employee, upon being informed that such employee is using over-the-counter or prescription drugs which could interfere with the performance of his/her duties shall make further inquiries to determine whether the employee is fit to perform those duties. Upon consultation with his/her commanding officer, the supervisor will decide whether the employee is fit for duty. If unfit, the employee shall be placed on personal leave. Should the employee and the commanding officer not concur on the ability of the employee to perform his/her duties, the department staff duty officer will make the final determination. Information regarding the use of legal drugs being taken by an employee will be forwarded to the JSO Personnel Division where it will be maintained in a confidential medical file.
D. All Sheriff's Office employees have an obligation to inform a supervisor or ranking officer if another employee is using drugs in violation of the law or Sheriff's Office Rules and Regulations.
E. If any employee knowingly ingests any drug in the performance of his/her duties, the supervisor on duty will be immediately notified and the incident reported on Form P-004. The supervisor will see that the employee is provided with immediate medical attention if necessary. The employee will be placed on an appropriate duty status. The incident will be documented with the initiation of Form P- 004 to be followed by a detailed report from the employee's commander through channels to the Sheriff. Every effort should be made to avoid such ingestion. Unless employees' lives are endangered, they will refrain from the consumption, ingestion, injection, or inhalation of a substance which may either physically or mentally be dangerous to employees.
F. Employees knowingly subjected to the passive inhalation of a drug, such as marijuana, will submit a Form P-004 to the supervisor on duty. The report will indicate the substance the individual was exposed to, the period of time exposed, and give a brief statement explaining the necessity for the exposure. The report will be forwarded to the Sheriff for review.


12.5 Drug Screening Program

A. The Employer shall post a notice of the department's drug testing policy on bulletin boards in areas that are accessible to employees.
B. Urine testing of employees can be an effective means by which to identify those in need of counseling, treatment, or disciplinary action. The testing program is intended  to  supplement,  not replace, other means by which the use of drugs can be detected.
C. Employees will be required to participate in the drug  testing program under the following conditions:
(1) When there is a reasonable suspicion that an employee is using, under the influence of or in possession of illegal drugs, or is using or under the influence of alcohol while on duty, or that the employee is abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the abuse either adversely affects his/her job performance or represents a threat to the safety of the employee, coworkers, or the public. Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can be ordered by any supervisor with the approval of a commanding officer (lieutenant or above). An immediate supervisor requesting a drug/alcohol test founded on reasonable suspicion should consider among such facts and inferences:

(a) Observable behavior while at work, such as direct observation of drug/alcohol use or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the influence of a drug/alcohol.

(b) Abnormal conduct or erratic  behavior  while at work or a significant deterioration in work performance.

(c) A report of drug/alcohol use provided by a reliable and credible source which has been independently corroborated with observable behavior.

(d) Evidence that the employee has tampered with a drug/alcohol test during his/her employment with the Employer.

(e) Information that an employee has caused or contributed to an accident while at work combined with observable behavior indicating the possibility that drug/alcohol usage may be involved.


(f) Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs, or used or been under the influence of alcohol, while working or while on the Employer's premises or while operating the Employer's vehicle, machinery, or equipment.

(2) Following a serious accident or incident in which safety precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these actions were the result of using drugs.

(3) Routine fitness for duty: The Employer will require a drug test any time an employee is referred to a physician or psychologist for a fitness for duty examination.


(4) Random Drug Testing Program: As part of the Sheriff's Office random drug testing program each employee of the bargaining unit will be randomly assigned a number that will be the only source identifying the individual submitting a sample for drug testing.
(5) Follow-up testing: Should an employee in the course of employment enter, or be required by the Employer to enter, into an employee assistance program for drug-related problems, the Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test as a follow up to the program for up to two (2) years thereafter.
(6) When an employee is found  in possession of illicit drugs or when illicit drugs are found in an area controlled or used exclusively by the employee.
(7) During basic recruit training and prior to completion of an employee's probation.
(8) When an employee is transferred into, during the assignment, and when transferred from the SWAT Team, Bomb Squad, or any specialized unit where, during the assignment, the employee will be involved with narcotic investigations and/or have access to illicit drugs.
(9) As  part of a rehabilitation program  (mutually agreed  to by the affected employee and the Sheriff's  Office Administration).


(10) As a result of prior disciplinary proceedings against the employee related to the use of drugs. (Such testing shall be conducted by the Internal Affairs Unit with the approval of, and in coordination with, the JSO Chief of Personnel. The Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test as a follow up to the disciplinary action for up to two (2) years thereafter.
12.6 Procedure for Testing
A. Drug Testing Responsibility

(1) The JSO Personnel Division shall be responsible for drug testing of employees under-going basic recruit training, probationary Police Officers, and employees selected through the random drug testing program.
(2) The Internal Affairs Unit shall be responsible for drug testing of any employee whom it reasonably suspects has used or  is found to be in possession of a drug, or other controlled substance in violation of the law, Sheriff's Office orders, and rules and regulations. The Internal Affairs Unit  shall  also conduct drug testing of employees as the result of prior disciplinary proceedings related to the use of drugs.
B. Confidentiality

(1) All information, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda, and drug test results, written or otherwise, received by the Employer through a drug testing program are confidential communications.
(2) The release of information obtained through any of the drug testing programs shall be solely pursuant to a written consent form signed voluntarily by the person tested except where such release is compelled by a hearing officer, a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to an appeal  taken under this section, or when required for a departmental Disciplinary Hearing Board, arbitration, or Civil Service Board proceeding. Drug testing information shall also be released to the Bureau of Criminal Justice Standards and Training for the purpose of reviewing certification eligibility.

(3) Any employee authorizing the release of drug testing information must submit a signed communication to the JSO Chief of Personnel advising:
(a) The name of the person who is authorized to obtain the information,


(b) The purpose of the disclosure,

(c) The precise information to be disclosed, and

(d) The duration of the consent.

(4) The Employer shall use drug test results when consulting with legal counsel in connection with actions brought under or related to this Article or where the information is relevant to the Employer's defense in a civil or administrative matter.

12.7 Testing Procedures

A. The Employer shall pay the cost of all drug tests which are required of employees. Employees shall pay the costs of any additional drug tests not required by the Employer.

B. Prior to taking a drug test, employees must advise the Employer of any prescription or non-prescription medications they are taking. The Employer will provide information to the employee of the most common medications by brand or  common name which may alter or affect a drug test. Employees will also be advised of all drugs for which the Employer will test, described by brand or common names, as applicable, as well as by chemical names. Information regarding the use of prescription or non-prescription drugs taken by the employee will be presented in a written communication that will be maintained in a confidential medical file in the JSO Personnel Division. The ingestion of any prescription or non-prescription drug by an employee shall not preclude the administration of the drug test, but shall be taken into account in interpreting any positive confirmed results.

C. Individuals responsible for conducting  drug  tests  are  acting  under the direct authority of the Sheriff. Employees being tested shall cooperate  fully. Any  attempt to  alter  or  tamper with  the specimen, its container,  or  any  mechanical  device,  instrument,  or  document by any individual is  grounds  for  termination  and/or  prosecution under applicable Florida Statutes.

D. The Employer will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test samples that will afford protection to the employee to include:

(1) Specimens shall be collected with due regard to the privacy of the individual providing the specimen and in a manner reasonably calculated to prevent substitution or contamination of the sample.


(2) Specimen collection shall be documented and the documentation procedures shall include:

(a) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably preclude the likelihood of erroneous identification of test results.

(b) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation to the testing site shall be performed in a manner which will reasonably preclude specimen contamination or adulteration.

(c) The Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to ensure the proper record keeping, handling, labeling, and identification of all specimens to be tested.

E. When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).

F. The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing procedures shall be established in accordance with the State of Florida Agency for Health Care Administration in conjunction with the standards developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), regarding testing and protocol and procedures.

G. When employees are required to participate in any of the drug testing procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject to an EMIT (Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results of the initial test are negative, no further testing will be done.
(1) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned a number which will be the only means available  of identifying the individual who provided the specimen.

(2) Random numbers assigned to employees will be maintained in a confidential file under the direct supervision of the JSO Chief of Personnel.
(3) Specimen collection will not be taken at any of the correctional housing facilities and the specimen container will not reveal the name of the contributing employee.

The Employer will use the Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) to test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's system. The test will be performed by a Certified Breath

Analyzer Technician (BAT) using a EBT approved by the National Highway Safety Administration. If the initial test registers an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a confirmation test will be performed. The employee will be placed in a separate room under the observation of the BAT for at least 15 minutes, but not more than 20 minutes, after which he/she will be given a confirmation EBT.
H. Random drug testing conducted by the Employer may occur before, during, or immediately after the regular work period of the employee, and shall be compensated in accordance with this Agreement.

I. The Internal Affairs Unit shall be called whenever one or more of the circumstances described in Article 12.6(A)(2) comes to  the attention of members of the Sheriff's Office.

(1) Once called, the Internal Affairs Unit shall have complete authority over the investigation.
(2) The employee shall be advised in writing of the reason(s) for the order to submit to the test and that failure to do so constitutes failure to obey a direct order.
12.8 Results of Test

A. If the results of the initial test are positive, the Employer will submit the    sample    for    a    confirmation    test    using    a    GC/MS    (Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry) test or other  method specified by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test results that will be conducted by an outside licensed laboratory capable of supplying an analysis of drug content. When a confirmation test is necessary, the Employer will ensure the proper storage and transportation of the specimen to a licensed laboratory for processing.

B. After receipt of a positive confirmed test result from the testing laboratory, the Employer shall inform the employee of the positive test result, the possible consequences of such results, and the options available to the employee.

C. The Employer shall provide to the employee, upon written request, a copy of the confirmation test results.

D. Within ten (10) working days after receiving notice of a positive confirmed test result, the employee may submit information to the Employer explaining or contesting the test results, and why the results do not constitute a violation of the Employer's policy.


E. All reports of positive test results shall be received by the JSO Chief of Personnel and maintained in a confidential medical file.

12.9 Disciplinary Procedures

A. Any employee who refuses to submit to a drug test or whose confirmation drug test is found to be positive is subject to disciplinary action. Such disciplinary action is subject  to the grievance procedures provided for through Article 9 of this Agreement and the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

B. The employee may be either immediately suspended or reassigned pending the results of the confirmation test for the use of illegal drugs.

C. Positive confirmation tests for illegal drugs shall result in the immediate suspension of an employee which may be followed by termination proceedings. In appropriate cases, every effort will be made to help the employee deal with a legal drug problem  by proper referral to the Sheriff's Employee Assistance Program. However, if this effort fails or is obviously inappropriate given the nature of the problem, appropriate disciplinary action shall be initiated.

D. The Employer may discipline or discharge an employee on the sole basis of the employee's first positive confirmed drug test when the employee has either refused to participate in an employee assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program, as evidenced by withdrawal from the program before its completion, or a report from the program indicating unsatisfactory compliance; or by a positive test result on a confirmation test while participating in or after completion of the program.

E. The Employer shall discipline an employee, subject to termination proceedings, who has failed or refused to sign a written consent form allowing the Employer to obtain information regarding the progress and successful completion of an employee assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program.

F. Employees participating in an employee assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program may be considered as being in a temporary limited duty status.

G. The Employer shall not discharge or discipline an employee solely upon voluntarily seeking treatment, while under the employ of the Employer, for a drug-related problem if the employee has not previously tested positive for drug use, entered an employee assistance program for drug-related problems, or entered a drug rehabilitation program. However, the Employer shall terminate an employee when the presence of illicit drugs is confirmed. Employees who have been tested may not use this aspect of the Agreement as a means of protection from disciplinary action.

12.10 All laboratory Reports of a Drug Test Shall include:

A. The name and address of the laboratory which performed the test and the positive identification of the person tested (not the employee's social security number), or if applicable, the random number.

B. Positive results of confirmation tests.

C. A list of the drugs for which the drug analyses were conducted.

D. The type of tests conducted and the minimum cut-off levels of the tests.

E. Any correlation between medications reported by the employee and the confirmation test results.


ARTICLE 13: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION
13.1 The Sheriff, or designee, may impose an immediate suspension without pay in advance of the conclusion of any of the procedures set forth in the grievance and arbitration article or in the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations in the following cases:

A. When an employee has been arrested on a felony charge (other than arrests for incidents occurring in the "good faith" performance of their duties, such as accidental shootings);

B. When an employee fails a substance abuse test (with confirmation);

C. When an employee fails to obey a lawful direct order from  a superior officer; or

D. When an employee is a danger to himself/herself or others.

13.2 The immediate emergency suspension without pay must be issued by the Division Chief or above.

13.3 Upon request of the employee, within the next business day after an immediate emergency suspension, the employee will be afforded the opportunity to meet with the assigned Division Chief for the purpose of coordinating a meeting between the Sheriff or designee and the employee to determine any further action that may be taken.



Notes:

ARTICLE 14: FILES
14.1 Files that contain the following information will be purged on the following schedule:

A. Formal Investigations - Cases which are unfounded, exonerated, or not sustained - one (1) year from the date of case disposition.

B. Sustained Formal Investigations cases involving written reprimand without suspension - three (3) years from the date of case disposition.

C. Sustained Formal Investigations - cases involving written reprimand with suspension or loss of pay - five (5) years from the date of the case disposition.

D. Formal Counselings will be purged one (1) year from the  date  of issue. Official records of Formal Counseling will be maintained in the employee's division file, and not in the Internal Affairs unit. The employee's division file will follow the employee as that employee is reassigned throughout the agency.

E. Officers will be notified after their cases have been purged.

Files and other materials purged pursuant to this section may not be used as evidence by either party in any disciplinary or grievance proceeding or hearing.

Upon completion of any internal investigation, the officer on whom the complaint was made shall be notified. Should the internal file be requested by any public party, every reasonable  effort  will  be made to notify the involved officer(s) as to who the requesting party is, and the date and time as to when the file  will  be  made available. If, however, said officer(s) cannot be notified within twenty-four (24) hours, the requested information will be provided within the limits of governing statutes, court orders, etc. In such cases, officers will be notified that information from their files was released. When the Employer provides access to the internal investigation "Final Action Report" pursuant to a public record request, the Employer will also provide the party requesting access to the record(s) a written definition of the terms used to describe the disposition of the internal investigation(s). (Reference Schedule B)

14.2 The Employer will comply with applicable court orders and Section 119.07(3)(I), Florida Statutes, and until otherwise directed by court order, will not reveal the home address, telephone number, social security

number, or photograph of active or former law enforcement personnel; the home address, telephone number, social security  number, photograph, or places of employment of the spouses and  children  of such personnel; and the names and locations of  the schools and  day care facilities attended by the children of such personnel.

It shall be the right of any officer, at reasonable times,  to inspect and make a copy of his/her personnel records, internal file, and division file. All JSO personnel shall keep personnel matters confidential within the terms of this Article and applicable statutes.


ARTICLE 15: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN E
15.1 Applicability

This article shall apply to all permanent, probationary and provisional employees of the following categories:

A. Employees hired on or after October 1, 1968 and prior to January 10, 1989;

B. Employees hired prior to October 1, 1968, but chose not to remain subject to former sick leave and terminal leave policies in April, 1969;

C. Employees hired prior to October 1, 1968, who chose on or before September 30, 1968, to become subject to this provision; and

D. Those employees who select to use their option and participate in the personal leave plan shall remain in said plan until such time as this personal leave plan or policy should be changed. Then said employees shall have the right to exercise their option as to which plan they wish to participate in.

15.2 Leave Accrual Rates

Employees shall accrue personal leave with pay according to  the following schedule on a bi-weekly basis:

Upon Completion of Continuous ServiceHours Accrued Per Year0 months through 4 years1605 years through 9 years18410 years through 14 years20815 years through 19 years23220 years through 24 years25625 years or more280
The rate of accrual shall change to the higher rate at the start of the first pay period of the month in which the employee's employment anniversary occurs.

15.3 Rollback

Personal leave shall accrue to a maximum of 960 hours. The Employer will compensate the employees on an hour-for-hour basis for any accrued amount over 960 hours as of September 30 each year. These payments may be as early as the second pay day in November, but shall be made

no later than the first pay day in December at the September 30 rate of pay.

15.4 Leave Sellback

A. An employee who does not use all of the personal leave accrued in a fiscal year may be paid for all or part of the difference, on a percentage basis, between the amount of leave used and the amount of leave accrued for that fiscal year on an hour-for-hour basis. Payments will be made on the second payday in January at the September 30 rate of pay.

B. To receive such payment, the employee must make an irrevocable election of the percentage to be sold.  The election must be made no later than September 30 of the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the leave will accrue. Elections shall be made in accordance with administrative procedures established by the City of Jacksonville.

C. Employees otherwise eligible for this option who do not elect to sell a percentage of leave prior to the deadline will not be permitted to sell any leave.

D. This payment will not be available to an employee who would have less than eighty (80) accrued annual leave hours remaining after such payment.

15.5 Using Leave to Fund Deferred Compensation

The Employer will provide employees eligible to retire the option to use leave time to fund their Deferred Compensation Program pursuant to the terms of this article and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations in the following manner:

A. An employee who is within 3 years of normal retirement under the Police and Fire Pension Plan (PFPP,) and who wishes to sell back personal leave must notify the City, in writing, of his/her intent to sell back personal leave, no more than   three years prior to the date that the employee is eligible for normal retirement.

B. The notice of intent to sell back personal leave  becomes irrevocable once the employee makes such election.

C. When an employee elects to sell back personal leave, the City will compensate the employee for up to one-third of the total amount of accrued leave in the employee's personal leave and retirement accounts during each of the three years prior to the date of the employee's eligibility for normal retirement. Each year, the

employee will be compensated on an hour-for-hour basis for one third of the hours that were in the account(s) at the  time  the election was made. Leave will be depleted in three equal annual installments during the three-year period prior to normal retirement eligibility. Payments will be made on an hour-for-hour basis at the employee's regular rate of pay at the time  the  payments  are made. An employee's contribution to all deferred compensation accounts shall be limited by applicable IRS regulations.

D. Periods of employee election, and payment dates shall be established by the City of Jacksonville in accordance with IRS regulations. Any leave remaining in an employee's personal leave and/or retirement account will be paid to the employee in a lump sum at retirement.

E. This option is not available to an employee who would  have  fewer than eighty (80) hours personal leave remaining after the sell back.
15.6 Upon termination, which includes resignation and discharge not  for cause, the employee shall be paid for all accrued personal leave and all accrued retirement leave.
15.7 Upon retirement of an employee, said employee's  personal  leave account and retirement leave account shall be used or paid for on a hour-for-hour basis up to a maximum of nine hundred sixty (960) hours in each account under the following provisions:
A. Such leave may be taken either immediately prior  to  desired eligible retirement date, which leave may then be used for the fulfillment of time service requirements, or
B. Such leave may be taken following fulfillment of time service requirements;
C. Employee on such leave may be maintained on the regular payroll, thereby continuing to avail the employee of payroll deductions, pension contributions and insurance deductions;
D. Upon written request to be placed on such leave, said request shall be irrevocable;

E. While on such leave, an employee shall not accrue personal leave but shall be eligible for legal holidays and any general salary increases but not performance/step increases.

F. At the employee's option, such leave may either be taken or  be paid for in one lump sum on an hour-for-hour basis.

G. For the purpose of the Personal Leave Plan, retirement is defined in

the following manner:

(1) Full-time service as required by the appropriate pension plan.

(2) Early vested retirement under the appropriate provision for vesting.
(3) Ten years of service with the City for those employees covered solely by Social Security.

(4) Vested retirement with more than 10 years service with the City for those employees who are covered by the Florida Retirement System.

15. 8 Upon the death of an employee, the employee's next of kin or estate in accordance with the law, shall be paid for all accrued personal and retirement leave accrued on the basis of one (1) hour's pay for each hour in said accounts.

15. 9 The Sheriff, upon recommendation of the Meritorious and Awards Committee, shall provide an employee with commendation paid leave in the following manner:

Officer of the MonthOne dayOfficer of the YearFour days

ARTICLE 16: PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN P
16.1 This article shall apply to all permanent, probationary and provisional employees employed on or after January 10, 1989.
16.2 Method of Earning and Accruing Personal Leave:

A. Employees shall accrue personal leave with pay for straight time hours worked in accordance with the following schedule:

Upon Completion of Continuous ServiceHours Accrued Per Year0 months through 4 years1605 years through 9 years18410 years through 14 years20815 years through 19 years23220 years through 24 years25625 years or more280
B. Employees shall earn leave time based on time actually worked and time on approved leave with pay.

C. Personal leave will be credited to the employee at the rate stated in section 16.2 (A) on a bi-weekly basis. The leave shall be credited on the last day of the pay period.

D. The rate of accrual shall change to the higher rate at the start of the pay period in which the anniversary date of employment occurs.

16.3 Personal leave shall accrue to a maximum of six hundred (600) hours. At the end of the fiscal year, an employee with accrued  and  unused personal leave in excess of six hundred (600) hours will be paid for accrued and unused personal leave in excess of six hundred (600) hours at the employee's rate of pay at the end of the fiscal year.

16.4 Upon retirement or termination following the completion of ten (10) years of service, the employee shall be paid for all unused accrued personal leave on an hour-for-hour basis. Such employees shall have the option of using accrued personal leave immediately after or prior to their desired eligible retirement date and then be paid for the remainder of such leave at the employee's option.

16.5 Upon termination of employment with less than ten (10) years of service for other than retirement, the employee shall be paid for seventy-five per cent (75%) of all unused accrued personal leave on an hour-for-hour basis.



16.6 The Sheriff, upon recommendation of the Meritorious and Awards Committee, shall provide an employee with commendation paid leave in the following manner:

Officer of the MonthOne dayOfficer of the YearFour days

ARTICLE 17: USE OF LEAVE

17.1 Personal Leave

A. Accrued Leave

When eligible and authorized, employees may use their accrued personal leave for any reason.

B. Eligibility for Leave Use

Accrued personal leave may be taken at any time when approved by the appropriate Commanding Officer-Supervisor. Personal leave shall be scheduled with due regard to the employee's request with any extenuating circumstance to be  considered  and  consistent with the operating requirements of the JSO.

C. Leave Request and Approval Procedures

(1) Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note approval or disapproval  of such leave in a form  designated by the Employer.

(2) Except in cases of illness or emergency, requests for personal leave of up to two (2) consecutive working/shift days must be submitted for approval at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance,

(3) Except in cases of illness or emergency, requests for personal leave of more than two (2) and up to four (4) consecutive working/shift days must be submitted for approval at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance.

(4) Requests for leave due to illness or emergency shall be submitted as soon as practicable.

(5) Charging for Leave

(a) Employees will be charged for actual leave time taken, with a one-quarter (1/4) hour minimum.

(b) Leave will be charged only against an employee's regular work day and shall not be charged  for absences on prearranged overtime work, unscheduled call-in overtime work days, or holidays.


D. Advance Leave Scheduling Procedure

(1) Classification Seniority Priority Request

A request for one (1) or more consecutive working/shift days may be submitted on or before February 1st,  of  each calendar year for the following twelve months.  More  than one block of leave time may be requested. Advance scheduling of these leave requests will be accomplished as soon as practicable after February 1st on a classification seniority basis.

(2) Seniority Personal Leave List

Each squad, watch, zone, or section of a division shall establish a seniority personal leave list. Employees in each classification will select their personal leave and  the employee with the most seniority in classification shall have the right of first personal leave choice. The employee with the next higher seniority in classification will have the next right of choice and so on down the list.

(3) Scheduling After February 1

After February 1, personal leave will be scheduled on a first come, first serve basis for available dates.

17.2 Use of Leave for Illness and Emergencies

A. Illness

Accrued personal leave may be used for absence from duty due to the employee's illness.

Accrued personal leave may also be used in the case of serious illness in the employee's immediate family.

The term, "immediate family", as used in this Article, shall mean: an individual's spouse, children, mother, father, brothers, sisters, half- brothers, half-sisters, aunts, uncles, grandparents, grandchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, sons-in- law, daughters-in-law, step-parent, step-children, and  other relatives who permanently reside with the individual. Special consideration may also be given to any other person who has had a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the employee where such a person acted similar to and/or stood in the place of a mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of the employee.



B. Emergencies

In each case where an emergency situation arises or where serious illness exists at the home of a law enforcement officer, that law enforcement officer shall be granted sufficient time off  duty  to complete or make the necessary arrangements to alleviate that emergency situation or serious illness. Under Personal Leave Plans E and P, this time off duty  may  be  charged  to  the  employee's personal leave time, in the discretion of the appropriate supervisor.
C. Extended Illness

For employees who accrue personal leave under Personal Leave Plan E:

(1) If an extended illness causes an employee to use all of his/her accrued personal leave, then such employee  may  use his/her retirement account.

(2) In the event an employee has fewer than eighty (80) hours in the employee's personal leave  account,  the  employee  may use his/her retirement account for a bona fide illness of the employee at the employee's option. This option may also be used for a bona fide illness of  the  employee's  immediate family, if substantiated with a physician's statement that the employee's presence is necessary.

(3) An employee who requires eighty (80) or more hours of leave due to an extended and continuous illness, may elect to deduct the leave from his/her retirement leave account.

(4) The above options should be submitted upon the commencement of such leave or immediately upon returning to duty.
D. Documentation
All employees shall be required to furnish to the Employer such information as may be requested for the proper administration of this section.
17.3 Unscheduled Absence

A. Notification

For unscheduled absences not requested and approved  in advance, an employee must notify the Sheriff's Office as early as possible, but no
later than forty-five (45) minutes before starting time, on the first day the employee is unable to report for work. The employee will notify

the Sheriff's Office of the reason for the absence, and when the employee expects to return to work.
B. Investigation

Excessive use of unscheduled leave is subject to investigation by the Sheriff's Office. An employee will be counseled whenever a pattern clearly develops where an employee is abusing unscheduled leave. (Example: when unscheduled leave is combined with regular days off more than three (3) times annually.)

C. Unauthorized Absence

An employee who is absent and who fails to comply with rules and regulations governing leave usage will be charged with unauthorized absence.

D. Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note approval or disapproval of such leave on a form provided by the Employer.


ARTICLE 18: BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE
18.1 When Leave May Be Authorized

A. Bereavement Leave for Immediate Family Members

At the time of the death of a member of an employee's immediate family as defined in Article 18.2, the Employer may authorize the employee paid time off of up to five (5) days.

B. Funeral Leave for JSO Employee

An employee may be granted paid time off to attend the funeral of a JSO employee as authorized by the appropriate Assistant Chief or higher level official.

18.2 Definition of Immediate Family

For purposes of this Article, "Immediate Family" shall be defined as the listed relatives of the employee and the employee's spouse.

"Immediate Family" DefinedspousechildrenIncluding
step-children and children's spousesparentsIncluding step parents and parents-in-lawbrothers & sistersIncluding half- siblings, and brothers- and sisters- in lawaunts & unclesgrandparentsgrandchildrenother relatives who permanently reside with the employeeSpecial consideration may also be given to any other person who has had a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the employee, where such a person acted similar to, and/or stood in the place of, a mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of
the employee.
18.3 Provisions Governing Leave Authorization

A. The JSO will not unreasonably deny a request for Bereavement or Funeral Leave subject to the provisions of this Article.

B. The employee may be required to supply documentation of the death, as well as of the employee's relationship to the deceased, prior to approval of the funeral leave request.


(1) Needs of employees upon the death of a family member may vary depending upon individual circumstances.

(2) In determining the amount of funeral leave to be authorized in each situation, the JSO will take into consideration such factors as:

(a) Distance to the funeral location;

(b) Relationship of the employee to the deceased; and

(c) The demands the death has placed on the employee for funeral arrangements and other business matters.

An employee, who requires additional time to attend to family matters, or for the death of relatives not included in this definition, may request to use other accrued leave for bereavement purposes. Such requests for leave shall not be unreasonably denied.


ARTICLE 19: LEAVE DONATION
19.1   A.    In the event an employee is forced, after exhausting all terminal leave, holidays and personal leave, to be placed on leave without pay status, due to illness or off-duty injury, another employee may donate leave time (Annual Leave, Compensatory Leave,  or Holiday) to the ill or injured employee provided said donor has at least eighty (80) hours of personal leave accrued.

Employees donating compensatory leave may donate  no  more than eight (8) hours of their compensatory leave for each ill or injured employee per consecutive six (6) month periods.

In the event an illness is reclassified as a workers' comp injury, all such used and unused time will be returned to the original donor(s).

To properly administer this plan, the donating employee will report to the JSO Chief of Personnel and submit his/her days which will be dated for use in lieu of leave without pay days or until such time as the employee receiving such time returns to duty.

B.   Exception to Section 19.1(A):   No employee who was given the option to use accrued leave for the purpose of satisfying a disciplinary action requiring reduction of pay and who as a result of exercising that option is left without accrued leave may receive a donation of such leave time for the purpose  of  replenishing accrued personal leave lost for disciplinary reasons until the employee either has accrued leave equivalent to the amount of disciplinary reduction, or has been off work without pay for a period equal to the duration of the disciplinary penalty. Provided that this subsection shall only apply in those cases where a single incident gives rise to both the disciplinary reduction and the injury that resulted in the exhaustion of accrued leave.



Notes:

ARTICLE 20: MILITARY LEAVE
20.1 Leaves of absence, re-employment and other related rights of employees entering into the military service shall be as described under  the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act (USERRA) of 1994 and Chapter 115, Florida Statutes.

20.2 Employees who are commissioned reserve officers or reserve enlisted personnel in the United States military or naval service or members of the National Guard are entitled to leaves of absence  from  their  respective duties, without loss of vacation leave, pay, time, or efficiency rating, on all days during which they are engaged in  training  ordered  under  the provisions of the United States military or naval training regulations for such personnel when assigned to active or inactive duty.

20.3 Leaves of absence granted as a matter of right under the provisions of section 20.2 may not exceed 240 working hours in any one fiscal year. Administrative leaves of absence for additional or longer periods of time for assignment to duty functions of a military character shall be without pay and shall be granted by the Employer, and when so granted shall be without loss of time or efficiency rating.

20.4 Employees who request time off for military leave are responsible for advising their supervisor at the earliest possible time of the dates when they are scheduled for any training assemblies which conflict with their normal work schedule.

Employees may request adjustment of their schedules for a military weekend drill by written request to their supervisors. Such requests shall be submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to drill date. A determination under this section is not subject to the  grievance or arbitration process, but the employee may request a review by the division chief.

20.5 An employee granted an extended military leave may elect to be paid from accumulated annual leave.



Notes:

ARTICLE 21: HOLIDAYS
21.1 Employees in the bargaining unit shall observe those days established by this Agreement and Council Ordinance which consist of the following:

January FirstNew Year's DayThird Monday in JanuaryMartin Luther King's BirthdayThird Monday in FebruaryPresidents' DaySecond Friday of MayPolice Memorial DayLast Monday in MayMemorial DayJuly FourthIndependence DayFirst Monday in SeptemberLabor DayNovember EleventhVeterans' DayFourth Thursday in NovemberThanksgiving DayDay after ThanksgivingDay after Thanksgiving DayDecember Twenty-FourthChristmas EveDecember Twenty-FifthChristmas Day
Any day declared a holiday by Ordinance of the Council or proclamation of the Mayor.

21.2 Whenever an observed holiday shall occur on an employee's scheduled day off, the Employer may elect to schedule the employee to take a day off on another date mutually agreed upon or to compensate him/her at the straight time rate in order to equalize the observed legal holidays in Section 21.1.

21.3 Should any holiday not be used during a calendar year due to scheduling or other reasons, then that employee shall be allowed to carry over to the next year unused holidays. If for some reason the carry-over holidays are not taken by September 30 of that year, the Employer will compensate the employee for those days not taken. There will be nothing in this section which authorizes the carry-over of any holiday for which compensation has been made pursuant to Section 21.2 hereof.

21.4 Any permanent or probationary employee shall receive payment for any paid holiday unless:

A. Employee has an unexcused or unpaid absence on the last regular work day preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day following such holiday;

B. Employee is on leave of absence or layoff on the day on  which such holiday occurs;

C. Employee fails to report for work without justifiable reason for such absence having been scheduled to work on such holiday.


D. Employee is receiving workers' compensation or supplemental workers' compensation pay.

21.5 When any employee is required to work on a day observed by that employee as a holiday pursuant to 21.6, the employee shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times their regular rate of pay and shall be allowed to take a day off at a later date.

21.6 Those employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall observe holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services Directive on that subject. All other employees shall observe the holidays on the day on which the holiday occurs.


ARTICLE 22: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT
22.1 Purpose of Article

The purpose of this Article is to define hours of work; however, nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as a guarantee or limitation of the number of hours to be worked per day, days per week, or for any other period of time except as may be specifically provided herein. It is understood and agreed that the Office of the Sheriff is a twenty-four (24) hour, seven (7) days per week operation and that nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as prohibiting the rescheduling of manpower to suit the needs and requirements of the Office of the Sheriff, provided that contract requirements regarding notification and overtime will be met.

22.2 Work Period

The work period for Police Officers covered by this Agreement shall be a period of twenty-eight (28) consecutive days which may begin  on  any day of the week and the regular work schedule during that period shall consist of one hundred sixty (160) hours.

22.3 Overtime Pay

A. Overtime based on time worked in work period

Police Officers covered by this Agreement shall be compensated at time and one-half for all hours worked in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours in a work period except as otherwise provided in the Agreement. It is understood and agreed by the parties that any specific provisions of this Agreement providing for payment of overtime will supersede this section 22.3(a).

B. Overtime for more than 16 hours of work per day

Double time shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of sixteen
(16) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period.

C. Weekly Overtime

Employees covered by this Agreement will be paid at rate of time and one half (1/2) for all hours worked in excess of those normally scheduled in a forty (40) hour work week, or eighty (80) hour work period. Whenever an employee is required to work double the time normally scheduled, then an overtime rate of two (2) times the employee's regular rate will be paid for hours in excess of twice the normal schedule.




D. Premium Payments

Premium payments for hours worked shall not be duplicated. For the purpose of this Agreement, the following items of payment are agreed to be "Premium Payments."

(1) Holidays - 21.1

(2) Call-Back - 22.5

(3) Stand-By Pay - 24.1

(4) Depositions or Court-Time - 24.1

(5) Hearing Board or Internal Investigations - 23.3

(6) Pager Stand-By - 23.11

E. Compensatory Time

Compensation for overtime shall be in the form of cash payments unless compensatory time is mutually agreeable between the employee and the Sheriff. Police Officers may accrue up to four hundred eighty (480) hours of compensatory time; once this maximum amount of compensatory time is reached, compensation for additional overtime hours worked shall be in the form of cash payments. Compensatory time shall be earned at the same rate it would have been paid had cash payment been received. The Employer may require employees who have five (5) days or more of compensatory time accrued to utilize compensatory time. The Employer may also require employees who have two (2) or less hours of compensatory time accrued to utilize compensatory time.
22.4 Meal Periods

A. Employees on shifts will be provided a meal period when the workload permits.

B. The normal daily work schedule for all other employees covered by this Agreement shall have a meal period not to exceed forty-five
(45) continuous minutes when the workload permits.

22.5 Call Back

An employee who has left his/her normal place of work for his/her residence and is called back for overtime work shall be paid for such overtime in accordance with the above, provided that he/she shall

receive a minimum

payment of two and one-half (2-1/2) hours at time and one-half (1-1/2) their regular rate.  The minimum time provided herein does not apply if any early call-in period extended into the start of the employee's regular work period.
22.6 Authorization for Overtime Required

No employee may authorize overtime for themselves but shall be entitled to receive overtime as appropriately authorized by their supervisor.
22.7 Off Duty Call with Assigned Vehicle

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22.3 (A) when an officer assigned a vehicle on a permanent basis is off-duty and is required to handle a call by a designated supervisor (exception: when otherwise provided by General  Order) said employee shall be paid at the regular rate unless such duty required that officer to work in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours in the twenty-eight (28) day work period, in which case section 22.3 (A) shall apply.
22.8 The Employer agrees that it will comply with all provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Provided, however, that any arbitration decision alleged to be contrary to law may be appealed to the judicial system.
22.9 Regular Hourly Rate of Pay for Overtime Calculations

For the purpose of calculating overtime, the hourly rate of pay for all employees covered by this collective  bargaining  agreement,  the following payments shall be included:
(a) Shift Differential Pay (Weekly Basis)

(b) Education Incentive Payments (Monthly)

(c) Payments for Reaching Levels of Certification (Monthly)

(d) Longevity Pay (Monthly)

(e) Working Out of Classification Pay (Daily or Weekly Basis)

(f) Regular Base Salary (Monthly)

(g) Training Officer Differential Pay

All payments set forth above which are paid on a monthly basis shall be added together to reach a monthly base; that monthly base shall be multiplied by twelve (12) and then divided by fifty-two (52) to reach a weekly base; then the payments set forth above which are paid on a weekly rate shall be added to the weekly base to reach a final weekly base. The final weekly base shall then be divided by forty (40) to reach an hourly rate which will be the rate used to calculate the payment of

overtime.

Notes:

ARTICLE 23: WAGES
23.1 Employees shall be compensated in accordance with the pay plan attached as Schedules D and E as follows:

A. New employees in the classification of Police Officer shall be hired at step 1 of the current pay plan and shall progress thereafter, when eligible, on the current pay plan.

B. New employees in the classification of Police Recruit shall be hired at 95% of the Step One rate for Police Officers. Upon successful completion of field training, Police Recruits shall advance to Police Officer with a 12-month probationary period status and shall be paid at Step One of the Police Officer pay plan.

C. Each employee shall progress in the current pay plan, when eligible per Schedule C, based on total years of continuous service as a Police Officer and/or Police Recruit with the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

D. Salary rates at each step of the pay plan shall decrease as follows:

(1) A 3% salary decrease of all employees at each step of Schedules D and E effective on January 1, 2012;

(2) A 0% salary change at each step of Schedules D and E effective on October 1, 2012;

(3) A 0% salary change at each step of Schedules D and E effective on October 1, 2013.

23.2 Inter-Rank Differential

There shall be a seventeen and one-half percent (17.5%) differential between the pay rates for sergeants and officers at each step of the pay plan.

23.3 Out-of-Classification Pay

A qualified employee who is temporarily assigned by the supervisor to serve in a higher class or position for at least one continuous hour shall be paid for the period of time actually worked in the higher class at the rate for the step of the pay grade for the higher classification which is the same as the step to which the employee is assigned in the pay grade for his/her own classification.




23.4 Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees

College incentives shall be governed by the "Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees."

A. Employees are eligible for incentive payments on the following basis:

PAY INCENTIVE PLAN FOR COLLEGE DEGREES
Incentives Applicable to Employees Hired After October 1, 2006Degree or StatusMonthlyMaster of Arts or Science$200.00
PAY INCENTIVE PLAN FOR COLLEGE DEGREES
Incentives Applicable to Employees Hired Prior to October 1, 2006Degree or StatusMonthlyAssociate of Arts or Science$100.00Bachelor of Arts or Science$150.00Master of Arts or Science$200.00
B. The following rules shall govern administration of incentive payments for attainment of college degrees.1

(1) A newly-hired employee will be eligible for an incentive payment for which he/she qualifies under this Plan upon successful completion of probation as a Police Officer. Permanent Corrections Officers or Judicial Officers who transition to Police Officer shall not be required to complete probation in order to be eligible for incentive payment.

(2) An employee may only receive one level of incentive pay. Incentive payments for multiple degrees or credits are not cumulative.

(3) Payment of incentives will be effective as of the first day of


1 "A Judicial Officer who is subsequently appointed to the classification of Police Officer or Police Recruit shall thereafter be governed by the terms of Article 23 of the contract in chief, except that the former Judicial Officer shall not be entitled to receive educational incentive payments for an Associate of Arts, Associate of Science, Bachelor of Arts, or Bachelor of Science degree, regardless of the hire date of the Judicial Officer and notwithstanding that the Judicial Officer may have been receiving such payments while a Judicial Officer. This means that such an employee shall, for the purpose of education incentive payments payable under Article 23, be treated as if he/she was hired on or after October 1, 2006."

the pay period after which the employee provides required documentation of eligibility to the JSO Personnel Division.

(4) To qualify for incentive pay under this Plan, an employee must have graduated with a 2.0 GPA or "C" average.
(5) To qualify for any level of incentive pay, an employee must have a minimum of 18 credit/semester hours in Criminal Justice. For purposes of this Plan, "Criminal Justice" means the subjects outlined in the Criminal Justice Programs of Study as published in the catalog of Florida State College at Jacksonville.
(6) Only semester hours/credits from a college or university accredited by the Southern Association of Secondary Schools and Colleges or equivalent will be recognized for incentive pay qualification.
23.5 Employees assigned to work any shift other than the normal day shift shall receive the following shift differential pay:

Starting TimeDifferentialAfter 12:00 p.m.3.75% of base payAfter 10:00 p.m.3.50% of base pay
23.6 Evaluations

A. Employee evaluations shall be standard and in writing.

B. Except as provided in subsection 23.6(C), the rater must be a certified Police Officer of higher rank, or an appointed ranking member of the Sheriff's staff. The rater must be a person who has been taught about established JSO evaluation policies and procedures.
C  Officers who are on special assignment to the Mayor's Office, the Office of General Counsel, the State Attorney's Office, the JEA Special Investigation unit, and similar special assignments may be rated by a civilian supervisor from the office where the officer is on special assignment. In such cases, the civilian supervisor performing the evaluation will consult with the officer's next higher level police supervisor regarding the evaluation.

D. An employee who believes that the Employer has not followed the proper evaluation procedure (e.g., qualification of the  rater  or failure to follow written policy and procedure) may follow the grievance procedure as outlined in this Agreement through Step IV.

E. In the event the Employer proposes to change the existing evaluation system, the Employer and the F.O.P. agree to establish a committee, consisting of F.O.P. and management representatives from the JSO who will be given the opportunity to review and recommend procedural changes in the current evaluation system prior to implementation of any changes.
23.7 Incentive Programs

In addition to the regular wages provided under this Agreement, the Employer may elect to establish incentive programs for its employees. If the Employer elects to establish such incentive programs, the program may consist of awards of cash payments or other types of awards to individual employees or groups of employees as determined by the Employer in order to recognize job performance improvements, improved job safety records, suggestions or actions which result in job-related cost savings or job-related benefits, or other similar job-related improvements which can be documented and measured.
23.8 Field Training Officer Differentials

A. Qualified Field Training Officers shall be granted an additional five percent (5%) above their base pay for each day they are actually training an assigned police/reserve officer trainee.
B. Qualified Field Training Patrol Sergeants shall be granted an additional five percent (5%)    above their base pay for each day they are actually supervising a Field Training Officer who is assigned a Police Officer trainee.
23.9 Pilot Trainer Differential

Qualified Helicopter and Fixed Wing Pilot trainers, who have a FAA Certified Flight Instructor's Certification, shall be granted an additional five percent (5%) above their base pay for each day they are actually training an assigned trainee.
23.10 Payment When Required to Answer Pager while Off-Duty

When an off-duty employee is required by his/her supervisor to be answerable to a pager, he/she shall be compensated one (1) hour at the regular rate of pay for each day if the following requirements are met:
A. The employee must be the only officer in the Unit required to be answerable to a pager. (Except that in the Homicide Section, the entire unit on call shall qualify.)
B. The employee shall not have received a call to duty during the  time he/she is required to be answerable to a pager.
23.11 Canine Care


Officers assigned to canine duty shall receive one (1) hour per shift to provide canine care. The employee will be compensated for one (1) hour for canine care on the employee's day off. There shall be no premium compensation
for canine care unless the employee works in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours in the twenty-eight (28) consecutive day work period provided for in 22.2.
23.12 Special Assignment Differentials

     At  the  direction  of  the  Mayor,  the  City's  Director  of  Employee  Services may authorize payment of a monthly differential, in an amount determined by the Mayor, to bargaining unit employees regularly assigned to the Office of the General Counsel, or the Mayor's Office.

23.13 Reimbursement for Take Home Vehicles

Employees living outside Duval County, but within ten (10) miles of the county line, shall reimburse the City $25.00 per pay period for the use of the take home vehicle. The reimbursement will  automatically  be deducted from the employee's bi-weekly pay.   However, the following shall apply:

A. Should take home vehicles become inoperable as verified by the Office of the Sheriff, the assigned employee will be reimbursed at the rate of $3.56 per actual day worked; and

B. Employees assigned to a motorcycle unit without also being assigned an additional take home vehicle are exempt from this subsection.




Notes:

ARTICLE 24: COMPENSATION FOR COURT RELATED MATTERS
24.1 Duty Related Court Appearances

A. Payment for Required Telephone Standby While Off-Duty

When an off-duty employee is required by the State Attorney's Office or the Judge of any court to be on telephone standby, the employee will notify the court liaison officer of such order. The standby requirement will then be confirmed and the employee compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times his/her regular rate of pay for those hours the court is in session or until released accordingly.
B. Payment for Off-Duty Court Appearance

When an off-duty employee is subpoenaed to court or other proceedings for testimony or by the State Attorney  or Public Defender for pre-trial conference or deposition arising from duties performed as a Jacksonville Police Officer, he/she will be compensated in the following manner:

(1) For all off-duty employees on regular day off or approved leave, a four (4) hour overtime compensation will be credited for the first appearance on any given calendar day and a minimum of one (1) hour or actual time, whichever is greater, for all appearances thereafter. If there is no lapse between appearances, it shall be treated as one appearance.

(2) If a subpoena is directed for appearance to a private attorney's office for deposition arising out of official duties, compensation will be credited provided the court  liaison officer has confirmed the subpoena.
C. Payment for Court Appearance Before or After Duty

(1) One Hour or Less - Personnel eligible for overtime who are attending court or other proceedings arising out of the course of their official duties for one (1) hour or less before or after their scheduled tour of duty shall receive a minimum of one
(1) hour of overtime.

(2) More Than One Hour - Personnel attending court or other proceedings exceeding one (1) hour before or after tour of duty shall be paid a minimum of three  (3) hours or actual time, whichever is greater, at their overtime rate.

(3) If there is no lapse between appearances, it shall be treated

as one appearance.

24.2 Filing Information

A. Compensation for Filing Information While Off-Duty

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22.3(C) a one (1) hour minimum of overtime shall be paid when filing a direct information with the State Attorney's Office while off duty. If such filing extends beyond one (1) hour, then time used in excess of one (1) hour will be paid at the employee's regular rate of pay unless such time would be in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours during the employee's 28 day work period. In that event, the rate of pay would be time and one-half (l-1/2).

B. Compensation for Filing Information Before or After Duty

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22.3(C) if officers elect to file immediately prior to or after the employee's regular duty assignment, the employee will be compensated at the employee's regular rate of pay unless such time would be in excess of one hundred seventy-one (171) hours during the employee's 28 day work period. In that event the rate of pay would be time and one- half (1-1/2).

For the purpose of this section, immediately prior to shall be defined as one (1) hour prior to the regular duty assignment and after shall be defined as one (1) hour after the regular duty assignment.

24.3 Witness Appearance

A. Fact Witness

When an off-duty employee  is  required  to  appear  before  any hearing board, arbitrator, or  internal  investigation as  a fact witness (as opposed to a character witness) as the result of receiving a subpoena or direct order in the course and scope of employment, the employee will be compensated at the same rate as for  duty- related court appearances, as set out in Article 24.1 (c). A "fact" witness is one who testifies to what was seen, heard, or observed regarding an underlying event at issue. A "fact" witness is not  a witness who testifies to opinions, character, or like testimony.

B. Character Witness

Any employee who appears before any  hearing board,  arbitrator, or internal investigation to testify as a character witness (as opposed to a fact witness) whether or not as the result of receiving a subpoena, must request and use leave during the time necessary to appear and testify.


A character witness is one who offers an opinion about the reputation of a person or who describes specific instances of conduct of a person for the purpose of proving that person's character. Examples of testimony as a character witness include, but are not limited to cases where the witness testifies that the person has a good reputation in the community or within  the sheriff's office that the person is a law abiding citizen or good Police Officer, that the person has a good reputation for  truth  and veracity, or that the person has a reputation for being unreliable, untrustworthy.




Notes:

ARTICLE 25: FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM

25.1 The Employer has the right to require any employee to undergo a medical or psychological examination by an assigned doctor at any time to ascertain whether or not the employee is  physically  and  mentally capable of performing the duties required of  the  employee's classification.

25.2 This examination will be conducted on Employer time and at Employer expense. Time spent obtaining the examination shall be considered work time and shall be paid as such at the applicable rate of pay.



Notes:

ARTICLE 26: SAFETY AND HEALTH
26.1 The Employer agrees that it will conform to and comply with laws as to safety, health, sanitation and working conditions properly required by Federal, State and local law. The Employer and the F.O.P. will cooperate in the continuing objective of eliminating safety and health hazards where they are shown to exist.

26.2 Protective devices, wearing apparel, and other equipment necessary to protect employees from injury shall be provided by the Employer in accordance with established safety practices. Such practices may be improved from time to time by the Employer and the F.O.P. Such protective devices, apparel, and equipment, when provided by the Employer, must be used and the F.O.P. agrees that willful neglect and failure by an employee to obey safety regulations and to use safety devices shall be just cause for disciplinary action.




Notes:

ARTICLE 27: PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING
27.1 Employees shall be subject to annual physical ability testing, in accordance with the terms of the Jacksonville  Sheriff's  Office  Physical Ability Testing Policy as described in Article 34.
27.2 The parties agree to the following clarifications of the Physical Ability Testing Policy:
A. Changes to Test - The Employer is permitted to make administrative changes to the Physical Ability Test. Examples of permitted changes include but are not limited to: improving the  surface  of  the  test course, removing handles from test dummy, and making similar improvements to test equipment.
B. Concerted Police Activity - An injury that occurs while in the course of "concerted police activity" is defined as  an injury that occurs while the officer is actively involved in police actions.
C. Thirty Day Grace Period - An employee who fails the physical ability test will  be given a grace period of  thirty calendar days during which he/she may retake the test. During this thirty day grace period, the employee will be required to initiate and participate on duty in the rehabilitation provided for in the policy. However, the disincentives listed in the policy will not go into effect unless the employee fails to pass the test within the thirty day grace period.
D. "Forfeiture of Annual Step Raise" - the step raise normally provided to the employee will be delayed to such time when the employee passes the physical ability test. Once the employee passes  the physical ability test, the annual step raise will be granted (provided that the employee is otherwise eligible for step raise) as follows:
(1) The raise will be retroactive to the date that the step raise would normally be provided in those cases where no part of the delay is attributable in any way to the employee.
Examples of cases where no part of the delay is attributable in any way to the employee:
* The test was postponed or delayed by the Employer because the testing facility was not available and the employee rescheduled to the next available date.
* The test was postponed or delayed because the employee was on special assignment at the direction of the Employer.
(2) The raise will be prospective only in all other cases (for example, when the employee requests a postponement, or

when the employee does not pass the test.)
E. "Forfeiture of Take Home Car "and "Forfeiture of Police Related Secondary Employment "means that these will be withheld until the employee has passed the physical ability test.

F. Priority for Accommodations - Section 34.2 of the Accommodation section of the Physical Ability Test Policy establishes a priority listing which will be used in determining which employees will be bumped because the number of qualifying officers exceeds the number of available Permanent Light Duty Positions. The third priority ("officers who are most senior") refers to the fact that officers who are more senior and eligible for retirement will be bumped before officers who have not qualified for retirement.


ARTICLE 28: INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUTY
28.1 An employee who sustains a temporary disability which results in payment of a wage benefit under the Workers' Compensation Laws of the State of Florida shall be granted a supplemental payment under the following conditions:

A. During the first twenty eight (28) calendar days of such disability, the employee shall receive net supplemental pay based upon his/her net take-home pay reduced by the Workers' Compensation indemnity payable. In no event shall any employee receive more than his/her net after-tax take-home pay from the City.

B. Thereafter, the Employer, may, at its sole discretion (which discretion shall not be subject to contest or arbitration), grant additional injury- in-line-of-duty leave in increments of twenty eight (28) calendar days. Such extensions shall be cumulative, not to exceed twenty- four weeks, except as noted in the following paragraphs.

Any such employee injured shall be examined every twenty eight
(28)  calendar  days  by  a  medical  doctor(s)  selected  by  the
Employer.

In the event such employee fails to return to duty due to disagreement between a medical doctor(s) for  the employee and the Employer, then the Employer shall select a duly qualified medical doctor who shall resolve the medical disagreement. In resolving the medical disagreement between  the  employee's doctor and the Employer's doctor, the judgment, discretion and decision of the doctor selected to resolve such medical disagreement shall be final and not subject to arbitration. If such injured-in-line-of-duty leave continues through the twenty-fourth (24th) week following the pay period in which such injury occurred, the employee's supplemental pay shall be terminated. Termination of supplemental pay to  the employee shall also occur  on the date of any medical determination that the employee will be unable to return to duty within the twenty-four (24) week period which began on the first day such employee was unable to work due to injury-in- line-of-duty. After termination, the employee's  right  to compensation shall be governed by the provisions of the Workers' Compensation Laws of the State of Florida, and by his/her entitlement to pension rights and sick leave benefits, if any. (Note: The Employer (Sheriff or his/her designee) in its sole discretion, which discretion cannot be changed or modified by an arbitrator, may provide a defined extension to the twenty-four (24) week period, not to exceed twenty (20) days for each extension).




C. An employee who is temporarily partially disabled from performing the duties of his/her classification due to a covered condition  may be temporarily reassigned without reduction in pay, in accordance with the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations, to other duties commensurate with the employee's qualifications, his/her physical and psychological restrictions and availability  of appropriate employment.

28.2 This Article shall be subject to and governed by the provisions of Chapter 440, Florida Statutes.


ARTICLE 29: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
29.1 Employee Death Payments

In the event of an employee's death, payment shall be made for any and all accrued overtime, vacation leave, and other terminal leave benefits which such employee would have been entitled to receive under the applicable provisions of law and only in the following sequence; to  the wife or husband; or to any child or children over the age of eighteen (18), or to the designated guardian if the child or children are under the age of eighteen (18); or the mother or father; or thereafter to the designated administrator of the deceased employee's estate.

29.2 Reimbursement for Use of Personal Vehicle

Where an employee is required to use his personal automobile in the performance of his duty, said employee will be reimbursed for operating expenses at the rate per mile traveled as prescribed by applicable City Council Ordinance, exclusive of mileage traveled to and from said employee's work location. Parking space will  be provided  for  employees who are required to use their personal vehicle as a condition of employment in the  performance of  their  duties, provided  parking spaces are available.

29.3 Comprehensive Medical Coverage

The Employer agrees to provide a choice of comprehensive group health plans from which the employee may select,  including  one  high deductible health plan at no cost to the employee. Effective January 1, 2012, employees will be required to pay five percent (5%) of the actual cost of any health plan selected other than the high deductible plan, but such a payment shall be capped and not exceed  thirty dollars ($30.00) per month. In addition, the Employer will pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost of comprehensive medical coverage of eligible dependents. The employee will pay the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the cost.

29.4 Dental Health Plan

The Employer agrees to pay the premium per month, per employee covered by this Agreement for the purpose of providing payment of a comprehensive dental health plan for the employees.

29. 5	Payroll Deductions for Agent of Record

The Employer agrees to provide a payroll deduction process that is to be available to employees in the bargaining unit for various employee plans. This provision shall not be construed to compel the Employer to enter into

any contractual arrangements with third parties or to undertake any legal liability not expressly provided for in this Agreement.

These plans shall be administered by the "Agent of Record" so designated by the F.O.P. It is understood and agreed that the Employer may assess a charge not to exceed four (4) cents per deduction per payroll. Further, it is agreed that the Employer assumes no responsibility or liability to or for the F.O.P.'s Agent of Record. Solicitation for these plans shall only be made at times mutually agreed to by the City's Department of Employee Services, Jacksonville Sheriff's Office, and the F.O.P. so as to prevent loss of productivity.

If the F.O.P. provides the Employer with  at least 100 signed enrollment forms from bargaining unit employees authorizing their enrollment in an
F.O.P. sponsored employee plan or activity, the Employer will create and assign a payroll deduction code for that plan or activity. If, after the creation of the payroll deduction code, the enrollment for that plan or activity falls below seventy-five (75), the City may delete the payroll deduction code from the City payroll system and discontinue payroll deductions for the plan or activity.
29.6 Voting

During an election, an employee whose hours of work do not allow sufficient time for voting shall be allowed necessary time off with pay for this purpose. Where the polls are open two (2) hours before or two (2) hours after the regular scheduled work period, it shall be considered sufficient time for voting.

29.7 F.O.P. Heart/Hypertension Special Benefit

Purpose: To provide special benefits to law enforcement officers who suffer heart disease and/or hypertension subsequent to their date of employment, but who are not otherwise covered under the Florida Workers' Compensation law.
A. Coverage and Limitations

(1) Medical

(a) Employees will file heart/hypertension claims for reimbursement of covered expenses through their City medical insurance carrier.
(b) The City will reimburse employees for covered co- payments and deductibles until the  employee  has been off work 52 weeks due to heart disease or hypertension, and is unable to return to work according to an approved medical doctor. Such reimbursements

shall not
exceed $3,500 per plan year and $10,000 lifetime and shall terminate once an employee retires under Pension Fund rules.
(2) Disability

(a) Upon application to the JSO Chief of Personnel, employees will continue to receive paid leave not otherwise chargeable for the first 84 calendar days of covered illness. After 84 calendar days have elapsed, the employee will receive paid leave at the rate of 2/3 of his/her salary for the next 84 calendar days. During this period, the employee, at his/her  option, may elect to retain full pay by utilizing sick leave or personal leave at one-third (1/3) day for each day. Thereafter, full sick leave or personal leave must be utilized.
(b) If an employee, due to heart/hypertension disability, is temporarily, partially disabled from performing the duties of his/her classification, he/she may be temporarily reassigned without reduction in pay in accordance with the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations to other duties commensurate with medical and mental fitness, availability of suitable work, and the employee's qualifications for the position.
(c) Second or subsequent heart/hypertension  claims will be considered only if the employee has returned to full duty for three months following the first incident. An employee shall not receive more than 36 weeks of full pay under this provision.

(3) Death

In the event of the death of an employee due to heart disease or hypertension prior to retirement, the City shall pay a death benefit/funeral allowance of up to $2500, but not exceeding actual funeral expenses.
(4) Disputes

Questions concerning payment of medical  and  pharmacy bills under this section will be resolved by a Special Benefit Committee consisting of the F.O.P. President or designee, the City's Director of Employee Services or designee and the JSO Chief of Personnel.
29.8 Career Development Program

The City shall fund the tuition reimbursement program $60,000.00 annually

for all F.O.P. bargaining unit members collectively. Reimbursement requests from any F.O.P. member necessitating funding in excess of
$60,000.00 annually may be denied or limited based upon available funding. Unused funding shall be reallocated annually as determined by the City.


Notes:



ARTICLE 30: LIFE INSURANCE
30.1 A. The Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for group term life insurance policy in the amount equal to the employee's  yearly salary with a double indemnity clause for accidental  death  for those employees covered by this Agreement.

B. In the event that the City is unable to obtain  life  insurance coverage from an insurance carrier for employees who are temporarily or permanently assigned to the helicopter or fixed wing section, the City will self-insure for this amount in lieu of paying premiums.

C. Benefits may be reduced at age 70, to 65% of the benefits  under the policy.

30.2 The Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for $250,000 life insurance covered per seat for all helicopter and fixed wing aircraft used by employees covered by this Agreement while on police business. Benefits may be reduced at age 70 to 65% of the benefits under the policy. In the event that the City is unable to obtain this coverage from an insurance carrier, the City will self-insure for this amount in lieu of paying premiums.




Notes:

ARTICLE 31: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT
31.1 The Employer shall furnish uniform(s) to all personnel who are required to wear such uniform(s) in the performance of their duties as set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Office of the Sheriff. Uniforms shall include all necessary equipment for the employee's performance of duty as a Police Officer including weapons, leather goods, foul weather gear, rain boots, cold weather gear and safety equipment, except socks and undergarments.
31.2 The Employer agrees that before new uniforms and new personally- assigned equipment are ordered, the F.O.P. will be consulted and asked to survey the members concerning any proposed change for uniforms and equipment. The F.O.P. may submit recommendations for the improvement of said uniforms or equipment; however, these recommendations are not binding upon the Employer.
31.3 Damage to Employee-owned Property

The Employer will  pay to repair  or replace covered personal  property  that is damaged while the employee is on duty, so long as  the loss  or damage did not result from  the  employee's  negligence. Payments  shall  be subject to the conditions set forth below.
A. Covered Personal Property

Covered personal property shall be defined as that equipment necessary for the performance of the employee's official duties including prescription eyeglasses/contacts lenses, prosthodontics, and watches. Covered personal property shall include non-uniform clothing. It shall not include telephones, pagers or electronic devices. With the exception of watches, jewelry is not covered personal property.
B. Payments

The Employer will make the determination to either repair or replace damaged or lost covered personal property based  upon  the relative costs of repair and replacement. Claims  must  be supported by reasonable proof of loss or damage, and documentation of cost, and shall be subject to claims-processing procedures established by the Sheriff.
(1) Payments authorized by this provision shall be reduced by the amount of any insurance reimbursement received by the employee for the loss or damage to the covered property.

(2) Payments under this provision shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), except that repair or replacement of

watches will be limited to one-hundred dollars ($100).
(3) The Employer shall make every reasonable effort to make payments authorized under this Section within thirty (30) days of the employee's submission of a claim.

31.4 Damage to Employer Property

When Employer property is damaged, destroyed, or lost as a result of an employee's negligence, carelessness, or failure to take reasonable steps to secure the property, the employee shall pay the cost of repair or replacement, up to a maximum of $400, subject to the conditions set forth below.

A. For purposes of this section, "negligence" and "carelessness" do not include inattention caused by the employee's immediate need to perform official duties and responsibilities.

B. Examples of failure to take reasonable steps to secure property include but are not limited  to:   leaving the property unattended in an unsecured location such as an open car or unlocked building.

31.5 Clothing Allowance

A. Employees who are required to wear business attire (e.g. dress coats or dress shirts and ties for men and civilian attire for women) during duty hours shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of one hundred dollars ($100) paid quarterly. Quarterly reimbursements shall occur the second pay period following the end of the quarter, provided the employee has worked or been on paid leave at least ten (10) days in each month of the quarter.

B. Employees in the Organized Crime Section who are required by the Employer to wear non-uniform type of clothing during duty hours shall be entitled to a clothing allowance of one hundred dollars ($100) paid quarterly. Quarterly reimbursements shall occur the second pay period following the end of the quarter, provided the employee has worked or was on paid leave at least ten (10) days in each month of the quarter.

C. An officer who uses personal or retirement leave prior to retirement in accordance with Article 15.7 shall not receive the Clothing Allowance while on such leave.


ARTICLE 32: SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
32.1 The number of hours an employee may work off-duty shall be limited to one hundred four (104) hours per month. An eight (8) hour rest period shall be mandated between an employee's ending tour of duty and the next beginning tour of duty. The eight (8) hour rest period also applies to the employee's days off. The one hundred four (104) hours per month of extra duty may be supplemented by annual or compensatory leave. During the 24-hour period encompassing an employee's scheduled work day, the employee may not exceed 16 hours of work. The Sheriff or designee may at his/her discretion waive the 104-hour per month limitation.

32.2 Employees who schedule approved secondary employment who are paid a scheduling fee shall pay a flat fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) a job per month scheduling fee.

32.3 The employee working secondary employment (or the secondary employer) will remit to the  Jacksonville  Sheriff's  Office  an  administrative fee of $5.00 per hour for each hour  paid, not necessarily worked. A  $7.00 per hour administrative fee shall be charged for any secondary employment where the police vehicle is  utilized  with  the  engine  running and emergency equipment in use for the majority of  the  assignment for traffic control during road construction projects, and/or lane closures. The
$7.00 per hour administrative fee shall not apply to police escorts. The administrative fee shall be in addition to the hourly rate paid to the officer or supervisor as set forth in section 32.7 below. Fees for increments of time less than an hour will be prorated.

32.4 Employees who intentionally evade the payment of the amounts required by this Article will face appropriate discipline, and/or loss of secondary employment.

32.5 Employees are prohibited from engaging in secondary employment while in an on-duty status.

32.6 All administrative fees for a one (1) month period must be paid to JSO by the 10th day of the following month. Employees whose payments are more than two (2) weeks late will be subject to appropriate discipline, which may include loss of secondary employment privileges.
32.7 The hourly rate, paid to the officer, for secondary employment shall be: Officers	$28.00
Supervisors	$31.00

32.8 Restrictions on Secondary Employment, as stated in applicable General Orders, and as amended by the Sheriff's Direct Review Committee, shall apply to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article.

32.9 Employees will not engage in secondary employment until  they have been off duty for  two regular days, or worked one day following sick leave, bereavement leave, injury on duty (IOD), light duty, suspension (with or without pay) or administrative leave.

32.10 An employee who is denied secondary employment in violation of the applicable General Orders may grieve the denial through Step 4 of the grievance procedure. The decision made at Step 4 shall be final.


ARTICLE 33: PROMOTIONS
Promotions within the bargaining unit shall be governed by the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations, except that the "rule of 3" as provided in the City Ordinance Code shall supersede the provisions of the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations. Any disputes relating to promotions shall be filed with the City's Employee Services Department and resolved exclusively through the Civil Service System




Notes:




34.1 Policy

ARTICLE 34: PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY


A. The Fraternal Order of Police (F.O.P.) and the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office (JS0) recognize that sworn employees need to maintain a sufficient degree of physical ability to handle the demands of the profession. Therefore, the parties have agreed to schedule an annual physical examination and physical ability test for Police Officers to assure that physical ability is maintained. The parties have also agreed to provide for a reasonable opportunity  for officers who fail the examination to gain compliance. Officers who cannot successfully pass the physical ability examination  after being afforded a reasonable opportunity to do so are subject to termination.

B. The physical ability test is job related, and is administered to ensure that those officers protecting the public meet minimal levels of physical fitness and do not pose a danger to themselves, fellow officers, or the public.

C. The Mission of the JSO is to protect the lives and property of the citizens of this community, to preserve peace, and to prevent crime and disorder. As a matter of policy, the JSO recognizes the following as essential components to the accomplishment of the JSO Mission:
(1) An able bodied, fully staffed department whose officers can effect an arrest and respond to emergency conditions; and

(2) Flexible staffing that grants managerial discretion to assign the right person into the right position; and

(3) Recognition that the assignment of supervisors must be need and performance based, and that assignments based merely upon an employee's physical condition is contrary to the fulfillment of the Mission; and

(4) Officers who are injured in concerted police actions should receive priority recognition; and

(5) The creation of incentives and disincentives will enhance officer physical conditioning; and

(6) A Department that is not physically fit will provide  less protection and less effective services at a much greater cost.





34.2 Administration of the Physical Ability Testing Program

A. Incentives:
In recognition of officers passing the physical ability test, those officers shall receive:

(1) Timely step raises as provided for in Schedule C of the Agreement;

(2) Consideration for promotion when ranked on a certified eligibility list;

(3) The thanks of the Administration and the Community who all recognize that an able and fit public safety force will provide enhanced protection and services at a lower cost to the community.

B. Disincentives:

In recognition that officers failing the physical ability test provide less service to the community, reduce the efficiency of the Department, and increase the costs to the taxpayers, those officers failing the physical ability test shall be subject to the following:

(1) Forfeiture of take home car privileges;

(2) Forfeiture of annual step raise;

(3) Delayed consideration for promotions;

(4) Forfeiture of police related secondary employment privileges.

C. Rehabilitation:

An officer who fails an annual physical ability test shall be given one
(1) calendar year from the date of the failure to pass the physical ability test.

(1) During that calendar year, the officer will remain on duty but will be required to participate in an on-duty training and/or conditioning program which will require the officer's participation at the training academy at least twice monthly. The program will be personally designed to enable the officer to ultimately pass the examination.






(2) If the officer so completely fails to pass the physical ability test that it demonstrates a more serious fitness for duty problem, the JSO may administer such other fitness for duty testing and take such prudent action that  would  otherwise  be reasonable under the circumstances.

D. Accommodation:

As to officers who have failed a physical ability test:

(1) After the one (1) calendar year set aside for rehabilitation, if the officer is still unable to pass the physical ability test, the officer shall be considered unable to  perform  the  officer's duties and if  the  officer  does  not qualify for  accommodation as set forth in Paragraph (2) below, the officer shall  be separated from employment as provided  for  in  the  Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

(2) If the officer's inability to pass the physical ability test in a year is a result of an ADA qualifying condition, the officer shall be accommodated as provided in paragraph (3) below; otherwise, the officer shall be separated from employment pursuant to the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations if the officer cannot be accommodated by retirement or reassignment to non-sworn service.

(3) An officer qualifying for accommodation in the sworn service pursuant to paragraph (2) above shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:

(a) The JSO shall make available a combined number of positions for up to 1.5% of the total sworn police ranks which will be designated as Permanent Light Duty positions for all of those officers who either qualify for accommodation under paragraph (2) above, or who qualify for permanent accommodations as a result of on-the-job injuries. Each such officer who wishes to be placed in a Permanent Light Duty position so designated must be able to perform  the functions of that position with the exception of an ability to effect an arrest and respond to an emergency.   A maximum of three (3) supervisory positions will be included within the total Permanent Light Duty positions.







(b) Any officer or supervisor who does not accept an accommodation into one of the Permanent Light Duty positions, or who does not opt for normal or disability retirement, or who does  not  accept  an accommodation to a non-sworn position, shall be subject to separation in accordance with the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations as a result of that officer's inability to perform the essential functions of the job.

(c) In order to ensure the maximum availability of accommodation for qualifying officers, officers serving in a Permanent Light Duty position described in Paragraph (3)(A) above, may serve in that position until and unless the officer is "bumped."

           "Bumping" occurs when the number of qualifying officers exceeds the number of available Permanent Light Duty positions. The criteria for bumping shall be as follows:

(i) When all positions described in Paragraph (3)(A) are filled by qualifying officers, and  another officer becomes qualified, the officer with the highest years of service shall no longer be entitled to the position and shall be accommodated by being provided  the opportunity to retire and or resign. Such  an officer who refuses to retire and or resign may then seek further accommodation to a  non- sworn position or shall be separated from employment pursuant to the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.

(ii) In the event all qualifying officers are not eligible for retirement or are not in the DROP program, entitlement to Paragraph (3)(A) positions shall be determined first by giving priority to officers injured as a result of concerted police action; secondly, by giving priority to officers who are injured on-the-job; and finally, by giving priority to officers who are most senior. An officer who is "bumped" may seek reclassification as an

accommodation, but if no other position is available, such officer shall be separated from employment pursuant to the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.





34.3 Appeal

The JSO believes that a policy implemented fairly and uniformly throughout the Department will provide consistency and fairness in its application. The JSO recognizes, however, that  exceptional circumstances may exist which might warrant making limited exceptions to this policy based on the extraordinary rehabilitative efforts of an officer or for such other extraordinary circumstances demonstrated by an officer. Therefore, an officer may appeal to the Sheriff, in writing, for an exception to the application of any part of this policy to that officer.

A. The officer must show extraordinary circumstances that would warrant the granting of such exception.

B. The Sheriff shall respond in writing to the officer and the decision of the Sheriff shall be final.




Notes:

ARTICLE 35: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
35.1 In any suit, legal action or proceeding, wherein an employee covered by this Agreement is sued as an individual, for damages, compensatory and/or punitive, which arises from their official duties, the Employer hereby agrees that it will provide legal counsel for said employee in accordance with Section 111.07, Florida Statutes. The employee shall have the right to retain an attorney of his choice at the employee's expense to defend the employee in any individual claim.

35.2 It is understood and agreed that employees shall furnish written notification of their intent to file suit against a third party in any court of law, if the suit arises out of the employee's official duties. Notice shall be provided to the Undersheriff, not less than five (5) days before the actual filing date.

35.3 Whenever any employee is involved in an accident with any vehicle owned, leased, or rented by the Employer, and said accident is solely a result of equipment failure or defect unconnected with any negligence or misconduct of the employee, the employee shall not be disciplined by the Employer for the accident or results thereof. Any alleged equipment failure or defect must be reported at the time of  the  accident  and included in the appropriate report. An employee's failure to follow the Written Directives applicable to vehicle care  and  maintenance  shall nullify the provisions of this section.




Notes:

ARTICLE 36: SEVERABILITY
In the event any article, section or portion of this Agreement should be held invalid and unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only to the specific article, section, or portion thereof specified in the court's decision; and upon issuance of such decision, the Employer and the
F.O.P. agree to immediately negotiate a substitute for the invalidated article, section, or portion thereof.




Notes:

ARTICLE 37: RESIDUAL RIGHTS
37.1 The Employer retains all rights, powers, functions, and authority it had prior to the signing of this contract except as such rights are specifically relinquished or abridged in this contract.

37.2 All matters pertaining to terms of employment and working conditions guaranteed by law to employees within the bargaining unit shall apply to the extent that they are not in conflict with the provisions of this Agreement.




Notes:

ARTICLE 38: ENTIRE AGREEMENT
38.1 The parties acknowledge that during negotiations which resulted in this Agreement each had the unlimited right and opportunity to  make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter  not removed by law from the area of collective bargaining and that the understandings and agreements arrived at by the parties after the exercise of that right and opportunity are set forth in this Agreement. This Article shall not be construed to in any way restrict parties from commencing negotiations under the applicable law on any succeeding agreement to take effect upon termination of this Agreement.

38.2 Except as provided otherwise in this Agreement, this Agreement shall be effective October 1, 2011 and shall remain in force to and including September 30, 2014.

38.3 There shall be a reopener in negotiations for Fiscal Year 2011-2012 limited to Articles 29 & B-8, Employee Benefits (negotiations shall not be limited to the employee benefits stated with these articles).

The F.O.P. or the City must provide the other a thirty (30) day notice within Fiscal Year 2011-2012, but prior to the beginning of reopening negotiations over the Employee Benefits articles. During the initial negotiation session, the parties agree to pre-schedule nine (9) additional negotiation sessions, three (3) subsequent negotiation sessions for each of the following three
(3) consecutive months. Negotiations shall continue as needed thereafter pursuant to Chapter 447, Florida Statutes.




Notes:



            SCHEDULE A BARGAINING UNIT CLASSIFICATIONS

Sworn Bailiff Judicial Officer Police Recruit Police Officer Police Sergeant




Notes:

SCHEDULE B
SAMPLE MEMORANDUM FINAL ACTION REPORT

TO:	Party Requesting Public Records Related to Internal Investigations

FROM:	Jacksonville Sheriff's Office

DATE:	January 1, 2006

RE:	Final Action Report - Disposition

In accord with the State of Florida's General Records Retention Schedule for Law Enforcement Agencies, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office maintains a "Final Action Report" that lists the disposition of all internal investigations.
The terms used in the Final Action Report to describe the disposition of the matter are defined as follows:
Exonerated - The internal investigation determined that the alleged actions occurred but were lawful and proper
Formal Counseling - A formal counseling session is a discussion between a supervisor and a subordinate in which the subordinate's behavior and necessary improvements are brought to the employee's attention.   Formal counseling is not discipline.
Information - Letter Sent - A review by Internal Affairs showed that an investigation was not warranted. The complainant was sent a letter advising of this. No discipline or formal counseling is imposed on the officer.
Information Only -The internal investigation did not result in a formal summation. No discipline or formal counseling was imposed on the officer. A record of the matter is maintained by JSO for documentation purposes only.
Not Sustained -The internal investigation determined that there was insufficient evidence available to prove or disprove the allegation.
Supervisor Referral - Letter Sent -- A review by Internal Affairs showed that a formal investigation by JSO IA was not warranted. However, the Watch Commander is sent the information informally to review and discuss with the officer. The Watch Commander is also responsible for contacting the complainant.  The Watch Commander has the option of formally investigating the matter or not.
Sustained -The internal investigation determined that there was a violation of agency rules and/or regulations.
Unfounded -The internal investigation determined that allegations are false or

not supported by the facts.




Notes:

             SCHEDULE C REQUIREMENTS FOR PAY ADVANCEMENT
The JSO Personnel Division Director shall submit in writing to the City's Director of Employee Services the advancement in salary of each employee who has met the requirements for pay advancement as provided herein. Provided the following conditions are met, the employee's advancement through the steps of the Pay Grade to which assigned shall be automatic, beginning on the first day of the first pay period following completion of one (1) year of continuous service subsequent to his/her date of employment if the following conditions are met:

Conditions:

(1) The employee is in good physical and mental health capable  of performing the duties of a Police Officer. (See Article 27, Physical Ability Testing)

(2) The employee's performance in the job is satisfactory for the year prior to advancement to the next step.

(3) If the performance of the employee is not satisfactory or his/her health is such that he/she cannot perform his/her duties, the step increase may be delayed for a period of six (6) months at which time, his/her performance will be reevaluated. If his/her performance has not improved substantially, the delay can be extended for another six (6) months for another evaluation. This process will be repeated until the employee's performance improves to the required standard. Injury on duty will not be a satisfactory reason to preclude advancement.

(4) The employee will be advised in writing as to the reason his/her step increase was denied; and if  the employee does not agree, he/she may use the grievance procedure which will be inserted at Step II or may file a grievance with the Civil Service Board.

(5) All recommendations for salary advancement within grade shall bear the approval and recommendation of the employee's Activity Supervisor and Commanding Officer.

(6) Those employees eligible to receive steps shall have their time of service calculated based on their years of continuous service as a sworn Police Officer or Police Recruit with the Office of the Sheriff.

(7) Requirements for advancement within the pay grades of the Pay Plan as specified in the above procedures shall require continuous, satisfactory service with the Office of the Sheriff.

(8) This  Pay  Plan  is  designated  to  provide  the  career  officer  with  the

opportunity to advance and remain as a first-line street officer.




Notes:

SCHEDULE D
CITY OF JACKSONVILLE SHERIFF'S OFFICE
POLICE OFFICER, POLICE OFFICER SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT AND POLICE OFFICER PILOT
FIFTEEN (15) STEP PAY PLAN

PAY GRADE13.1313.13

STEP
   BASED ON COMPLETION OF:MONTHLY / ANNUAL 10/1/2008 -
12/31/2011MONTHLY / ANNUAL 01/1/2012 -
09/30/201410-12 MONTHS$3,277$3,179$39,324$38,14821 YEAR$3,464$3,360$41,568$40,32032 YEARS$3,647$3,538$43,764$42,45643 YEARS$3,810$3,696$45,720$44,35254 YEARS$3,993$3,873$47,916$46,47666 YEARS$4,699$4,558$56,388$54,69678 YEARS$4,771$4,628$57,252$55,536810 YEARS$4,846$4,701$58,152$56,412911 YEARS$4,922$4,774$59,064$57,2881012 YEARS$4,997$4,847$59,964$58,1641113 YEARS$5,069$4,917$60,828$59,0041214 YEARS$5,145$4,991$61,740$59,8921315 YEARS$5,219$5,062$62,628$60,7441416 YEARS$5,293$5,134$63,516$61,6081517 YEARS$5,367$5,206$64,404$62,472Numbers are approximate due to rounding.




Notes:

SCHEDULE E
CITY OF JACKSONVILLE SHERIFF'S OFFICE POLICE SERGEANT
ELEVEN (11) STEP PAY PLAN





PAY GRADE13.1413.14

STEP
   BASED ON COMPLETION OF:MONTHLY / ANNUAL 10/1/2008 -
12/31/2011MONTHLY / ANNUAL 01/1/2012 -
09/30/201410-5 YEARS$5,067$4,915$60,804$58,98026 YEARS$5,521$5,355$66,252$64,26038 YEARS$5,605$5,437$67,260$65,244410 YEARS$5,695$5,524$68,340$66,288511 YEARS$5,783$5,610$69,396$67,320612 YEARS$5,871$5,695$70,452$68,340713 YEARS$5,956$5,777$71,472$69,324814 YEARS$6,046$5,865$72,552$70,380915 YEARS$6,133$5,949$73,596$71,3881016 YEARS$6,220$6,033$74,640$72,3961117 YEARS$6,306$6,117$75,672$73,404Numbers are approximate due to rounding.




Notes:



APPENDIX A CERTIFIED BAILIFFS

Preamble
Article A-1	Articles Adopted by Reference Article A-2	Grievances & Separations Article A-3	Holidays
Article A-4	Hours of Work and Overtime Payment Article A-5	Wages
Article A-6	Injury in Line of Duty Article A-7	Life  Insurance Article A-8	Management Rights Article A-9	Military Leave
Article A-10	Miscellaneous Provisions Article A-11	Discharge and Discipline
Article A-12	Alcohol & Drug Abuse Policy and Procedures Article A-13	Matters Not Addressed
Article A-14	Leave




Notes:

APPENDIX A: PREAMBLE
On November 18, 1997, the State of Florida Public Employees Relations Commission (PERC) certified the Fraternal Order of Police as the bargaining agent for full-time, temporary, sworn, certified bailiffs. The employees, who are described in the November 18, 1997, order of the Public Employees Relations Commissions Case Number RC-97-031, will be referred to in this Appendix as "eligible employees." This Appendix sets forth the agreement reached by the City of Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police ("F.O.P.") with regard to the terms and conditions of employment of the eligible employees.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
A-1.1 The current provisions of Articles 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 26, 36, 37, and 38 of the Agreement reached between the City of Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police, Consolidated Lodge No. 5-30 ["the Agreement"] (Police Officers through Sergeants)] are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof.


ARTICLE 1:F.O.P. RECOGNITIONARTICLE 2:F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFFARTICLE 4:MANAGEMENT SECURITYARTICLE 6:SPECIAL MEETINGSARTICLE 9:GRIEVANCE PROCEDUREARTICLE 26:HEALTH & SAFETYARTICLE 36:SEVERABILITYARTICLE 37:RESIDUAL RIGHTSARTICLE 38:ENTIRE AGREEMENT



Notes:

ARTICLE A-2: GRIEVANCES AND SEPARATIONS
A-2.1 Grievance Procedure

The employees covered by this Agreement are classified as Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs pursuant to Section 121.134, Ordinance Code, who do not have a property interest in their employment.   Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs do not have a right to the Civil Service complaint/grievance procedure. The sole procedure available to Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs to grieve application of the terms of this Agreement shall be the Article 8 grievance procedure, provided that grievances of disciplinary actions shall be processed solely in accordance with Article A-11: Discharge and Discipline.

A-2.2 Separations

Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs may be separated from employment without cause. When separated without cause, Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs shall receive ten (10) days written notice of separation, or ten
(10) days pay in lieu of notice, or any combination thereof. This provision shall not apply to Temporary Part Time Bailiffs discharged for disciplinary reasons.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-3: HOLIDAYS
A-3.1 Eligible employees shall be entitled to compensation, as provided for in sections A-3.2 and A-3.3 for the eleven (11) holidays listed below, or on any day declared a holiday by ordinance of the City Council, or proclamation by the Mayor.

DATEEVENTJanuary FirstNew Year's DayThird Monday in JanuaryMartin Luther King's BirthdayThird Monday in FebruaryPresidents' DayLast Monday in MayMemorial DayJuly FourthIndependence DayFirst Monday in SeptemberLabor DayNovember EleventhVeterans' DayFourth Thursday in NovemberThanksgiving DayDay after ThanksgivingDay after Thanksgiving DayDecember Twenty-FourthChristmas EveDecember Twenty-FifthChristmas Day
A-3.2 Eligible employees who are not required to work on a holiday listed in section A-3.1 will be compensated for eight (8) hours at their regular hourly rate. However, no eligible employee who works less than forty
(40) hours per week will receive compensation for a holiday unless the holiday is observed on a regularly-scheduled workday of the eligible employee.

A-3.3 Employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall observe holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services Directive on that subject.

A-3.4   In addition to the holiday compensation provided for in subsection A- 3.1, eligible employees who are required to work on a holiday shall be compensated at one and one-half (1-1/2) times their straight time pay for all hours worked on the holiday.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-4: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT
A-4.1 SCHEDULES

Eligible employees' work schedules shall be set at the sole discretion of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

A-4.2 OVERTIME

A. Eligible employees shall be required to work overtime when and as required. All overtime must be authorized and approved by the appropriate supervisor.

B. An eligible employee shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week. All compensated time shall be included as "hours worked" when calculating the 40 hour/week threshold.

C. An employee who is called in to work outside of, and not continuous with, his/her regularly-scheduled working hours shall be compensated for the time worked at the straight time rate until the employee has worked forty (40) hours for the week, at which time the employee shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-5: WAGES
A-5.1 Certified Bailiffs shall be compensated at the rate determined by the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

A-5.2 Certified Bailiff Sergeants may be hired at a rate of 20% above the pay rate of Certified Bailiffs.

A-5.3 Incentive Program

At its sole discretion, the Employer may from time to time elect to establish incentive programs for individuals or groups which may consist of cash or other awards in recognition of improved job performance, improved job safety records, innovative ideas that result in savings or other benefits, or other similar work-related improvements, provided the F.O.P. is informed in writing of any such programs.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-6: INJURY IN-LINE-OF-DUTY
An eligible employee who sustains a temporary disability as a result of injury in the course of, and arising out of, employment by the Employer shall be entitled to the benefits payable under the Workers' Compensation Laws of the State of Florida.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-7: LIFE INSURANCE
The Employer shall provide ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) group term life insurance for all eligible employees, at no cost to the employee.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-8: MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
A-8.1 It is the right of the Employer to determine unilaterally the purpose of each of its constituent agencies, set standards of service to be offered to the public, and exercise control and discretion over its organization and operations, including the right to subcontract. It is also the right of the Employer to direct its employees, take disciplinary action, and relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons, provided, however, that except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the exercise of such rights shall not preclude employees or their representatives from raising grievances, should decision on the above matters have the practical consequences of violating the terms and conditions of this collective bargaining agreement.

A-8.2 Whenever it is determined that Civil Emergency conditions exist, including riots, civil disorders, hurricane conditions, or similar catastrophes, the provisions of this Agreement may be suspended by the Mayor and/or the Sheriff during the time of the declared emergency provided that wage rates and monetary fringe benefits shall not be suspended.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-9: MILITARY LEAVE
Eligible employees shall be paid for military leave at their regular hourly rate times the average number of hours they have worked per day during the six weeks prior to the military leave (e.g. 40 hours a week worked - 8 hours pay; 30 hours a week worked - 6 hours of pay; 20 hours a week worked - 4 hours pay) to the extent required by the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act of 1994 and the Florida Statutes and any other applicable laws.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-10: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
A-10.1 In any suit, legal action or proceeding, wherein an eligible employee is sued for damages, compensatory and/or punitive, which arises from his/her official duties, the Employer will provide legal counsel in accordance with Section 111.07, Florida Statutes.

A-10.2 It is understood and agreed that eligible  employees  shall  furnish notification, in writing, of  their  intent  to  file suit in  any  court of law, to the Office of the Sheriff, not less than  five  (5) days  before  the actual filing date, provided that said law suit affects or is connected in any manner with the Employer.

A-10.3 When an eligible employee is involved in an accident with any vehicle owned, leased, or rented by the Employer, and said accident is a result of equipment failure or defect, unconnected  with  any misconduct of the employee, the eligible employee shall not be held accountable by the Employer for the accident or results thereof. Any alleged equipment failure or defect must be reported  at the  time  of the accident and included in the vehicle defect section of the report. Neglect by the employee in failing to present the vehicle for proper maintenance will nullify all provisions of this section.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-11: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE
A-11.1    Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs shall not be subject to Part 3 Chapter
37 Ordinance Code and may not file a grievance to challenge disciplinary action, but may challenge discharge only through the system provided in this article.

A-11.2 Temporary Part Time Court Bailiffs are at-will employees and may be separated from employment by the Sheriff at any time and for any reason. A terminated employee who believes that he/she has been stigmatized by his/her dismissal may receive a Name-Clearing Hearing from the City's Director of Employee Services upon written request submitted within ten (10) calendar days of the dismissal.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-12:	ALCOHOL & DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES

A-12.1 Mutual Agreement

The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug-free workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for the protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The drug and alcohol testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of society.

The parties further agree that drug use and alcohol abuse have serious adverse effects upon users in the work force resulting in the loss of productivity, posing a threat to the workplace and to public safety and security. Maintaining a healthy and productive work force and safe working conditions free from the effects of drugs and alcohol are goals of both the Employer and the F.O.P. The parties recognize that drug use creates a variety of workplace problems, including increases in on-the-job injuries, in absenteeism, and in the financial burden on health and benefit programs. Criminal justice work requires, and the safety of the public demands, optimum mental and physical functioning of employees at all times. In the interest of public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a responsibility to monitor employees' use and abuse of controlled substances and other drugs/medicines.
Employees who believe that they may be abusing drugs are encouraged to contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming this problem.
A-12.2Definitions

A. "Alcohol abuse" means the use of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, on or off duty, which impairs or otherwise adversely affects the employee's ability to perform his/her job duties. Using or being under the influence of alcohol or alcoholic beverages on the job by City employees is strictly prohibited.
B. "Drug abuse" means the ingestion of any controlled substance as defined in Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time, not pursuant to a lawful prescription. The term "drug abuse" also includes the commission of any act prohibited by Chapter 893, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time.

C. "Illegal drug" means any controlled substance as defined in Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time, not possessed or taken in accordance with lawful prescription.

D. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs (the DHHS Guidelines) means those guidelines as printed in the April 11, 1988 Federal Register (53 C.F.R. 11970), as they may be amended from time to time.

E. "Reasonable suspicion" means a suspicion which is based on specific, objective facts derived from  the  surrounding circumstances from which it is reasonable to infer that further investigation is warranted.

A-12.3	Circumstances When Testing May be Required

A. The Employer may require an eligible employee to submit to alcohol and drug testing under any of the following circumstances:

(1) As part of the initial screening process for employment.

(2) When there is a reasonable suspicion that an eligible employee is using, under the influence of, or in possession of alcohol or illegal drugs while on duty, or that the employee is abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the abuse either adversely affects his/her job performance or represents a threat to the safety of the employee, co-workers, or  the public. Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can be ordered by a captain or higher level commanding officer.

(3) Following a serious accident or incident in which safety precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these actions were the result of using drugs or alcohol.

(4) As part of the Sheriff's Office random drug testing program. Such random drug testing may occur before, during, or immediately after the regular work period of the employee, and shall be compensated in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.

B. The Employer will pay the cost of any tests required by this article.

C. Eligible employees who are tested on the basis of reasonable suspicion may be returned to their job, assigned to a different work location, or placed on leave pending receipt of the test results.

D. Failure or refusal to submit to substance abuse testing as required by this article shall be cause for discharge.

A-12.4	Drug Testing Protocol and Procedures

The Sheriff's Office will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test samples that will afford protection to the employee to include  the following:

A. Specimens shall be collected with due regard for the privacy of the individual providing the specimen and in a manner reasonably calculated to prevent substitution or contamination of the sample.

B. When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).

C. Documentation of specimen collection shall include:

(1) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably preclude erroneous identification of test results.

(2) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation  to  the testing site shall be performed in a manner which will reasonably preclude specimen contamination or adulteration.

(3) The Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to ensure the proper record keeping, handling, labeling, and identification of all specimens to be tested.

(4) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned a number which will be the only means of identifying the individual who provided the specimen. The assigned numbers will be maintained in a confidential file under the direct supervision of the JSO Chief of Personnel.

D. The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing procedures shall be established in accordance with the State of Florida Agency for Health Care Administration in conjunction with the standards developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), regarding testing and protocol and procedures.

E. When eligible employees are required to participate in any of the drug testing procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject to an EMIT (Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results of the initial test are negative, no further testing will be done.




F. If the results of the initial test provided for in Section 12.4(E) are positive, the Employer will submit the sample for confirmation testing using  a  GC/MS  (Gas  Chromatography/Mass  Spectrometry)  test  or other method specified by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test results. This test will be conducted by an outside licensed laboratory capable of analyzing drug content. When a confirmation test is necessary, the Employer will insure proper storage and transportation of the specimen to the laboratory for processing.

G. If the results of the second test provided for in Section 12.4(f) are positive, as confirmed by a qualified medical review officer, the Employer shall promptly notify the employee of the results. At that time, the employee may elect to have the second sample tested.

H. A confirmed positive test result for the second sample (or for the first sample if the employee chose not to have the second sample tested) shall be grounds for discharge.

I. The Evidential Breather Testing Device (EBT) will be used by the Employer to test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's system. The test will be performed by a Certified Breath Analyzer Technician (BAT) using a EBT approved by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. If the initial test registers an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater, a confirmation test will be performed. The employee will be placed in a separate room under the observation of the BAT for at least 15 minutes but not more than 20 minutes, after which he/she will receive a confirmation EBT test.

J. The Employer will, to the extent permitted by law, keep the results of any testing required by this article confidential. Furthermore, any positive test results which the Employer later determines to have been refuted shall have affixed thereto the subsequent refutation. Test results shall be considered confidential medical records.

A-12.5	Applicability of General Order XV.2

Eligible employees shall be subject to General Order G.O. XV.2 Drug Screening Program.


ARTICLE A-13: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED
To the extent any provision of the Agreement reached between the City of Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police,  is  not  adopted  herein  by reference, or is not specifically addressed in this Appendix A, said provision is null and of no effect as it relates to eligible employees covered by this Appendix A.




Notes:

ARTICLE A-14: LEAVE
A-14.1 Effective each September 30, during the life of this Agreement, each eligible employee shall be credited with a bank of leave hours in accordance with the following:

  Hours Worked "Old" Fiscal YearLeave Hours Credited "New" Fiscal Year1820 - 2080801560 - 1819601040 - 155940Less than 1040-0-
Effective September 30 after an employee's four (4) year anniversary date as a certified bailiff, the leave hours credited shall be 120 if that employee works a minimum of 1820 hours during the previous fiscal year.

No employee will be entitled to the higher leave hours unless they maintain the minimum of 1820 hours in each fiscal year.

A-14.2 Effective each September 30, leave hours credited on the previous September 30 but not used shall be forfeited. There shall be no payment for credited but unused leave.

A-14.3 If a fulltime, temporary sworn certified bailiff is appointed to a Judicial Officer position, without a break in service, his/her credited but unused leave hours shall be transferred to his/her Leave Plan P account on an hour-for-hour basis.

A-14.4 Policies governing donated leave shall not be applicable to eligible employees.

A-14.5 Leave must be requested and approved in accordance with policies established by the Sheriff's Office.

A-14.6 Eligible employees may be granted up to two (2) days off without loss of pay as bereavement leave not otherwise chargeable upon the death of the employee's spouse, child, mother, father, grandmother or grandfather. Bereavement leave of one (1) day may be granted upon the death of other members of an eligible employee's immediate household.




Notes:

APPENDIX B: JUDICIAL OFFICERS


B-1Articles Adopted by ReferenceB-2Discharge and DisciplineB-3Use of LeaveB-4Military LeaveB-5HolidaysB-6Hours of Work and Overtime PaymentB-7WagesB-8Employee BenefitsB-9Uniforms and EquipmentB-10Comprehensive Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy and ProcedureB-11Matters Not Addressed



Notes:

ARTICLE B-1: ARTICLES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
B-1.1 The following articles from the October 1, 2011 - September 30, 2014 Police Officers' collective bargaining agreement shall be applicable to Judicial Officers.

1F.O.P. RECOGNITION2F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF3F.O.P. ACTIVITIES4MANAGEMENT SECURITY5MANAGEMENT RIGHTS6SPECIAL MEETINGS7BULLETIN BOARDS9GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE13EMERGENCY SUSPENSION14FILES16PERSONAL LEAVE PLAN P18BEREAVEMENT AND FUNERAL LEAVE19LEAVE DONATION25FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM26HEALTH & SAFETY36SEVERABILITY37RESIDUAL RIGHTS38ENTIRE AGREEMENT



Notes:

ARTICLE B-2: DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE
B-2.1 All discipline taken against a Judicial Officer shall be for proper cause. The procedure for dismissals, demotions, and suspensions shall be as outlined in the City of Jacksonville Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations and the Florida Law Enforcement Officers'  Bill  of  Rights, Section 112.532, Florida Statutes, as in effect upon signing  of  this Agreement unless modified in this Agreement. Should the Florida Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights be repealed (Section 112.532, Florida Statutes), said repeal will not affect or modify the provisions of this section.
B-2.2 Judicial Officers in their initial twelve (12) month probationary period who are dismissed from employment shall have no right to a Civil Service Board hearing, or to appeal pursuant to this Agreement.
B-2.3 A.	Disciplinary Hearing Board

     There shall be established a Sheriff's Disciplinary Hearing Board for the purpose of such hearings. Said Board shall be composed of five (5) members, with two (2) members being selected by the administration, two (2) members being selected by the aggrieved officer; and the fifth member being selected by the other four (4) members. The board members shall be law enforcement officers who are currently employed by JSO. No member o f this Board shall be a relative of the aggrieved officer, as defined by the Civil Service Board Rules. The hearing will be informal. Neither the aggrieved officer nor the Employer shall utilize an attorney for the presentation during the informal hearing proceedings. During the hearing, the aggrieved officer will be provided the opportunity to respond to the  charges  against him/her, and to tell his/her side of the story. The aggrieved officer shall be permitted to provide a list of witnesses, and present evidence as part of a defense. Any member of the Board may request, through the chairperson, to call upon the witnesses provided to give testimony germane to the events leading to the charges being levied. The Board will review the information presented during the informal hearing, and consider the JSO disciplinary standards, and then make a recommendation to the Sheriff about the level of discipline (if any) that it believes should be imposed in the case The Board's decision will be advisory and not binding upon the Sheriff. If the decision of the Sheriff is unsatisfactory to the aggrieved officer, he/she may appeal this decision to the Civil Service Board within ten (10) days, or request arbitration within five (5) working days, as provided in Article 9.6 Step IV. It is agreed that the convening of the Sheriff's Disciplinary Hearing Board shall be effectuated as expeditiously as possible following charges being levied against the
aggrieved officer. Should the accused officer request to

continue a hearing or delay its convening, then it is agreed that the officer waives his/her emoluments in exchange for the continuance of the hearing.
B. No suspension with loss of pay shall be implemented until any requested civil service or arbitration hearing has been held and an opinion rendered except as provided for in Article 13. (This shall not apply to terminations.)


ARTICLE B-3: USE OF LEAVE
B-3.1 Use of Leave for Illness

A. Accrued sick and personal leave may be used for absence from duty due to illness. Accrued sick or personal leave may also be used in the case of serious illness in the employee's immediate family. The term, "immediate family", as used in this Article, shall mean: an individual's spouse, children, mother, father, brothers, sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, aunts, uncles, grandparents, grandchildren, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters- in-law, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, step-parent, step-children, and other relatives who permanently reside with the individual. Special consideration may also be given to any other person who has had a close, long-standing, personal relationship with the employee where such a person acted similar to and/or stood in the place of a mother, father, brother, sister, or grandparent of the employee.

B. In each case where an emergency situation arises or where serious illness exists at the home of a Judicial Officer, the employee shall be granted sufficient time off duty to complete or make the necessary arrangements to alleviate that emergency situation or serious illness. Under Personal Leave Plan P, this time off duty may be charged to the employee's personal leave time, in the discretion of the appropriate supervisor.

C. All employees shall be required to furnish to the Employer such information as may be requested for the proper administration of this section.

D. An employee must notify the Sheriff's Office as early as possible and no later than forty-five (45) minutes before starting time the first day the employee is unable to report for work because of illness. The employee will notify the Sheriff's Office of the nature of the employee's illness and the approximate amount of time the employee will be absent.

E. Use of leave for illness is subject to investigation by the Sheriff's Office. An employee will be counseled whenever a pattern clearly develops where an employee is abusing leave taken for illness. (Example: when leave for illness is combined with regular days off more than three (3) times annually.)

F. Should an employee be absent due to illness and fail  to comply with the rules and regulations covering leave, such employee will be charged with unauthorized absence.

G. Pregnancy and Childbirth: Disabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy, child birth, other related conditions or illnesses, and the recovery from such conditions or illnesses are, for all job- related purposes, genuine illnesses and should be treated as such. Employees may take leave on the same general terms and conditions for such illnesses as are otherwise applicable under leave provisions of this Agreement.

B-3. 2	Use of Personal Leave

A. Employees, when eligible and authorized, may use their  personal leave for any reason they deem necessary.

B. Accrued personal leave may be taken at any time when approved by the appropriate Commanding Officer-Supervisor. Any such personal leave shall be scheduled with due regard to the employee's request with any extenuating circumstance to be considered and consistent with the requirements of the Employer's operation.

C. (1) Leave requests for personal use of up to  two  (2) consecutive working/shift days  must  be  submitted  in  writing for approval at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance, unless the personal leave is for illness. In the latter case, written requests shall be submitted as soon as practicable.

(2)    Leave requests for personal use of more than two (2) and up to four (4) consecutive working/shift days must be submitted in writing for approval at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance, unless the personal leave is for illness. In the latter case, written requests will be submitted as soon as practicable.

D. Advance Scheduling of Leave

(1) Seniority Personal Leave List

There will be established in each a seniority personal leave list. Employees with the most seniority in classification shall have the first right of personal leave choice. The employee with the next higher seniority in classification will have the next right of choice and so on down the list.

(2) Scheduling After February 1

After February 1, the scheduling of personal leave will be accomplished on a first come, first serve basis for available leave dates.





B-3.3 Upon written request with at least thirty (30) days advance notice, an employee taking at least two (2) weeks of authorized paid vacation may have advanced to him/her on his/her last regular pay day prior to beginning the paid vacation, his/her normal bi-weekly take home pay.

B-3.4 Employees shall request leave and the Employer shall note approval or disapproval of such leave on a form provided by the Employer.

A. The minimum amount of personal leave to be taken and charged shall be one-half (1/2) hour for the first half-hour. Personal leave will be charged only against an employee's regular workday and shall not be charged for absences  on  prearranged  overtime  work and/or unscheduled call-in overtime work-days or holidays.

B. Should a legal holiday fall within an employee's scheduled personal leave period, no personal leave time will be charged  for  the holiday.




Notes:

ARTICLE B-4: MILITARY LEAVE
B-4.1 Leaves of absence and re-employment rights of employees inducted into military service shall be as provided in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 and the Florida Statutes. The following provisions shall govern to the extent that they are not in conflict with these statutes. In the event of conflict, the statutes shall govern.

B-4.2 Reserve Training: Any employee who is a member of the Armed Forces Reserve or of the National Guard will be granted military  leave  not  to exceed 240 working hours in a fiscal year after  presentation  of  official orders and submission of a Leave Request. The employee shall be paid for the number of working days occurring during this military leave, according to his/her regular work schedule.

B-4.3 Active Duty During Peacetime: Employees who enlist in the Armed Forces during peacetime are not eligible for military leave but are entitled to reemployment with the City within (90) days of release from active duty with an honorable discharge. This reemployment will be without loss of benefits or seniority. The reinstated employee will not accrue merit increases during the absence.

B-4.4 Any member of a Reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States who enters upon active duty (other than for the purpose of determining physical fitness and other than for training) or whose active duty is extended during a period when the President is authorized to order units of the Ready Reserve or members of a Reserve component to active duty shall be eligible for military leave benefits (pay for the number of working days, according to the employee's regular work schedule, occurring during the first thirty (30) calendar days of military leave).
B-4.5 Employees on military leave will receive any general salary adjustments that were granted during their absence to their job classification and earn time toward longevity during the unpaid period of military leave. Drafted or extended employees will continue to earn seniority credit toward longevity, annual leave and promotional examination.
B-4.6 Active Duty During Wartime: Any employee who enters the Armed Forces during a period of war between the United States and a foreign government or who is called to active duty in the Armed Forces or National Guard during wartime, shall be granted military leave for his/her period of military commitment. Upon presentation of official orders, such an employee shall receive pay for the number  of  working  days, according to his/her regular work schedule occurring during the first thirty
(30) calendar days of military leave.

An employee granted an extended military leave may elect to be paid for accumulated annual leave.

B-4.7 Employees may request adjustment of their schedules for a military weekend drill by written request to their supervisors. Such requests shall be submitted at least fourteen (14) days prior to drill date. A determination under this section is not grievable or arbitrable, but the employee may request a review by the division chief.


ARTICLE B-5: HOLIDAYS
B-5.1 Eligible employees shall be entitled to compensation, as provided for in sections B-5.3 and B-5.4 for the eleven (11) holidays listed below, or on any day declared a holiday by ordinance of the City Council, or proclamation by the Mayor.

DATEEVENTJanuary FirstNew Year's DayThird Monday in JanuaryMartin Luther King's BirthdayThird Monday in FebruaryPresidents' DayLast Monday in MayMemorial DayJuly FourthIndependence DayFirst Monday in SeptemberLabor DayNovember EleventhVeterans' DayFourth Thursday in NovemberThanksgiving DayDay after ThanksgivingDay after Thanksgiving DayDecember Twenty-FourthChristmas EveDecember Twenty-FifthChristmas Day
B-5.2		Any permanent or probationary employee shall receive payment for any paid holiday unless:

A. Employee has an unexcused or unpaid absence on the last regular work day preceding such holiday or on the next regular work day following such holiday;

B. Employee is on leave of absence or layoff on the day on  which such holiday occurs;

C. Employee fails to report for work without justifiable reason for such absence having been scheduled to work on such holiday.

D. Employee is receiving workers' compensation or supplemental workers' compensation pay.

B-5.3 Eligible employees who are not required to work on a holiday listed in section B-5.1 will be compensated for eight (8) hours at their regular hourly rate.

B-5.4 Employees who work a Monday through Friday work week shall observe holidays as set forth annually in the City Employee Services Directive on that subject.

B-5.5 Eligible employees who are required to work on a holiday shall be compensated at one and one-half (1-1/2) times their straight time pay for all hours worked on the holiday.




Notes:

ARTICLE B-6: HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT
B-6.1 SCHEDULES

Eligible employees' work schedules shall be set at the sole discretion of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

B-6.2 OVERTIME

A. Eligible employees shall be required to work overtime when and as required. All overtime must be authorized and approved by the appropriate supervisor. No employee may authorize overtime for himself/herself, but shall be entitled to receive overtime as appropriately authorized by his/her supervisor.

B. An eligible employee shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1 1/2) times the employee's regular rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week. All compensated time shall be included when calculating the forty (40) hour threshold.




Notes:

ARTICLE B-7: WAGES
B-7.1 Judicial Officers shall be compensated at the rate determined by the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office.

B-7.2 Upon successful completion of the initial probationary  period,  the  base salary of the employee shall be advanced five (5%) percent or to the maximum of the range, whichever is less.

B-7.3 Incentive Program

At its sole discretion, the Employer may from time to time elect to establish incentive programs for individuals or groups which may consist of cash or other awards in recognition of improved job performance, improved job safety records, innovative ideas that result in savings or other benefits, or other similar work-related improvements, provided the F.O.P. is informed in writing of any such programs.

B-7.4 At its sole discretion, the Employer may administer an "Employee Referral Program" with financial incentives  to encourage current employees to refer candidates for employment in city jobs. Incentives will be in the form of one-time payments. All eligible employees may participate in such a program and receive incentives under the same terms and conditions.

B-7.5 Employees may participate in the City's Career Development and Tuition Reimbursement Program under the terms and conditions as outlined in the City's Career Development Policy. The City shall fund the tuition reimbursement program $60,000.00 annually for all F.O.P. bargaining unit members collectively. Reimbursement requests from any F.O.P. member necessitating funding in excess of $60,000.00 annually may be denied or limited based upon available funding. Unused funding  shall  be reallocated annually as determined by the City.

B-7.6 Pay Incentive for College Degree

A. Effective as of October 1, 2006, the previous "Pay Incentive or College Credit" contained in Schedule B of  the  collective bargaining agreement will be discontinued and will  be  replaced with this "Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees."

B. Employees are eligible for incentive payments on the following basis



 Pay Incentive Plan for College Degrees Incentives Applicable to Judicial OfficersDegree or StatusMonthlyAssociate of Arts or Science$100.00Bachelor of Arts or Science$150.00Master of Arts or Science$200.00
C. The following rules shall govern administration of incentive payments for attainment of college degrees.1

(1) A newly-hired employee will be eligible for an incentive payment for which he/she qualifies under this plan upon successful completion of probation.

(2) An employee may only receive one level of incentive pay. Incentive payments for multiple degrees or credits are not cumulative.

(3) Payment of incentives will be effective as of the first day of the pay period after which the employee provides required documentation of eligibility to the JSO Personnel Division.

(4) To qualify for incentive pay under this plan, an  employee must have graduated with a 2.0 GPA or "C" Average.

(5) To qualify for any level of incentive pay, an employee must have a minimum of 18 credit/semester hours in Criminal Justice. For purposes of this Plan, "Criminal Justice" means the subjects outlined in the Criminal Justice Programs of Study as published in the catalog of Florida State College at Jacksonville.

(6) Only semester hours/credits from a college or university accredited by the Southern Association of Secondary Schools and Colleges or equivalent will be recognized for incentive pay qualification.







1 "A Judicial Officer who is subsequently appointed to the classification of Police Officer or Police Recruit shall thereafter be governed by the terms of Article 23 of the contract in chief, except that the former Judicial Officer shall not be entitled to receive educational incentive payments for an Associate of Arts, Associate of Science, Bachelor of Arts, or Bachelor of Science degree, regardless of the hire date of the Judicial Officer and notwithstanding that the Judicial Officer may have been receiving such payments while a Judicial Officer. This means that such an employee shall, for the purpose of education incentive payments payable under Article 23, be treated as if he/she was hired on or after October 1, 2006."


ARTICLE B-8: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
B-8.1 Terminal Leave Payments

In the event of an employee's death, payment shall be made for any and all accrued overtime, personal leave, and other terminal leave benefits which such employee would have been entitled to receive under the applicable provisions of law and only in the following sequence; to  the wife or husband; or to any child or children over the age of eighteen (18), or to the designated guardian if the child or children are under the age of eighteen (18); or the mother or father; or thereafter to the designated administrator of the deceased employee's estate.

B-8.2 Reimbursement for Use of Personal Vehicle

Where an employee is required to use his personal automobile in the performance of his duty, said employee will be reimbursed for operating expenses at the rate per mile traveled as prescribed by applicable City Council Ordinance, exclusive of mileage traveled to and from said employee's work location. Parking space will  be provided  for  employees who are required to use their personal vehicle as a condition of employment in the  performance of  their  duties, provided  parking spaces are available.

B-8.3 Comprehensive Medical Coverage

The Employer agrees to provide a choice of comprehensive group health plans from which the employee may select,  including  one  high deductible health plan at no cost to the employee. Effective January 1, 2012, employees will be required to pay five percent (5%) of the actual cost of any health plan selected other than the high deductible plan, but such a payment shall be capped and not exceed  thirty dollars ($30.00) per month. In addition, the Employer will pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost of comprehensive medical coverage of eligible dependents. The employee will pay the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the cost.

B-8.4 Dental Health Plan

Effective upon ratification, the Employer agrees to pay the premium per month, per employee covered by this appendix for the purpose of providing payment of a comprehensive dental health plan for the employees.

B-8.5 Life Insurance

The Employer shall provide and pay full premiums for group term life insurance policy in the amount equal to the employee's yearly salary with

a double indemnity clause for accidental death for those employees covered by this Appendix. Benefits may be reduced at age 70, to 65% of the benefits under the policy.
B-8.6	Payroll Deductions for Agent of Record

The Employer agrees to provide a payroll deduction process that is to be available to employees in the bargaining unit for various employee plans. This provision shall not be construed to compel the Employer to enter into any contractual arrangement with third parties or to undertake any legal liability not expressly provided for in this agreement.

These plans shall be administered by the "Agent of Record" so designated by the F.O.P. It is understood and agreed that the Employer may assess a charge not to exceed four (4) cents per deduction per payroll. Further, it is agreed that the Employer assumes no responsibility or liability to or for the F.O.P.'s Agent of Record. Solicitation for these plans shall only be made at times mutually agreed to by the JSO Personnel Division, Jacksonville Sheriff's Office, and the F.O.P. so as to prevent loss of production on work time.

B-8.7 Voting

During an election, an employee whose hours of work do not allow sufficient time for voting shall be allowed necessary time off with pay for this purpose. Where the polls are open two (2) hours before or two (2) hours after the regular scheduled work period, it shall be considered sufficient time for voting.


ARTICLE B-9: UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT
B-9.1 The Employer shall furnish uniform(s) to all personnel who are required to wear such uniform(s) in the performance of their duties as set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Office of the Sheriff. Uniforms shall include all necessary equipment for the employee's performance of duty as  a Judicial Officer.

B-9.2 The Employer agrees that before new uniforms and new personally assigned equipment are ordered, the F.O.P. will be consulted and asked to survey the members concerning any proposed change for uniforms and equipment. The F.O.P. may submit recommendations for the improvement of said uniforms or equipment; however, these recommendations are not binding upon the Employer.

B-9.3 Damage to Employee-owned Property

The Employer will pay to repair or replace covered personal property that is damaged while the employee is on duty, so long as  the loss  or damage did not result from the employee's negligence. Payments shall be subject to the conditions set forth below:

A. Covered Personal Property

Covered personal property shall be defined as that property necessary for the performance of the employee's official duties including non-uniform clothing, watches, prescription eye glasses/contact lenses and prosthodontics. It shall not include telephones, pagers, or electronic devices. With the exception of watches, jewelry is not covered personal property.

B. Payments

The Employer will make the determination to either repair or replace damaged or lost covered personal property based  upon  the relative costs of repair and replacement. Claims must be supported by reasonable proof of loss or damage,  and  documentation  of cost, and shall be subject to the claims-processing procedures established by the Sheriff.

(1) Payments authorized by this provision shall be reduced by the amount of any insurance reimbursement received by the employee for the loss or damage to the covered property.

(2) Payments under this provision shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) except that repair or replacement of watches will be limited to one-hundred dollars ($100).


(3) The Employer shall make every reasonable effort to make payments authorized under this Section within thirty (30) days of the employee's submission of a claim

B-9.4 Damage to Employer Property

When Employer property is damaged, destroyed, or lost as a result of an employee's negligence, carelessness, or failure to take reasonable steps to secure the property, the employee shall pay the cost of repair or replacement, up to a maximum of $400, subject to the conditions set forth below.

A. For purposes of this section, "negligence" and "carelessness" do not include inattention caused by the employee's immediate need to perform official duties and responsibilities.

B. Examples of failure to take reasonable steps to secure property include but are not limited  to:   leaving the property unattended in an unsecured location such as an open car or unlocked building.


ARTICLE B-10: COMPREHENSIVE DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES
B-10.1 Mutual Agreement

A. The Employer and the F.O.P. agree to the promotion of a drug free workplace through fair and reasonable drug testing methods for the protection of the City of Jacksonville and its employees. The drug testing policy of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is a proactive approach to a potentially serious problem facing all members of society. Within the limitations, as outlined in this Article, employees found to have drug abuse problems will be encouraged to participate in an employee assistance program or a rehabilitation program.
B. It is further agreed that drug use has serious adverse effects upon users in the work force resulting in the loss of productivity, posing a threat to the workplace and to public safety and security. Maintaining a healthy and productive work force and safe working conditions free from the effects of drugs are the goals of both the Employer and the F.O.P. It is understood that drug use creates a variety of workplace problems, including increased injury  on  the job, increased absenteeism, and increased financial burdens on health and benefit programs. Criminal justice work requires and the safety of the public demands total mental and physical functioning of employees at all times. The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office has a responsibility in the interest of public safety to monitor the use and abuse by employees of controlled substances, and other drugs/medicines.
C. The Employer has established drug testing standards to balance the interests of the Employer, employees, and the welfare of the general public through a fair, confidential, and  accurate  drug testing program.
D. Employees who feel that they are abusing drugs are encouraged to contact the Employee Assistance Program for help in overcoming this problem. Normal agency benefits such as the Employee Assistance Program, appropriate leave, and the  group  medical plan are available to aid in the rehabilitation process. Staff assigned to the Employee Assistance Program will support employees in this process by providing referral to the appropriate agency suited to address the particular need of the employee.
E. The sale, purchase, transfer, use, or possession of illegal drugs, or drugs obtained illegally, is a violation of state and federal criminal statutes and, therefore, may result  in  termination.  Use  or  being under the influence of alcohol while on duty presents a danger to

the public, to the officer involved, and to other officers, and therefore, may result in termination.

F. In order to maintain the integrity of the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office and to ensure public safety, the Jacksonville Sheriff's Office requires that all employees shall not:

(1) Abuse legal drugs;

(2) Sell, purchase, transfer, use, or possess illegal drugs, or drugs obtained illegally;

(3) Report for work and/or use Sheriff's Office equipment while under the influence of a legal drug taken as a medication to the extent that job performance would be affected.

B-10.2 Discussion

A. Drug screening provides management with a method  to assist in the detection of a possible problem so that it may be dealt with in the proper manner.

B. Drug screening of Sheriff's Office employees is a deterrent to their becoming involved with drugs. Additionally, it assists management in its efforts to detect drug problems within the Sheriff's Office. Drug screening provides an avenue for identifying a specific problem associated with drug use/abuse.

C. Personnel are cautioned that drug screening is not an absolute indicator of drug use. It is a single indicator that must be combined with other information before a final determination is made. The drug screening program is interwoven with established Sheriff's Office policy as it is affected by administrative procedures, internal investigations, Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights, criminal investigations, etc. The final determination (e.g. no action, disciplinary action, treatment or termination) is based on an accumulation of information and is consistent with the best interest of the Sheriff's Office and the employee.
B-10.3 Definitions

A. Controlled Substance - Any of the substances named in Schedules I through V of Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, and any "designer drugs" that may hereafter be proscribed by law and which are subject to manufacturing, distribution, preparation, dispensation, and administrative controls.

B. Employee Assistance Program - A confidential program designed to assist employees and their families with a multitude of problems that

may affect the employee's work performance.	Employees may volunteer for the program or be referred to it by their supervisors.


C. Confirmation Test - An additional analytical procedure used to identify the presence of a specific drug or metabolite  in  a specimen. The confirmation test must be different in scientific principle from that of the initial test procedure. The confirmation method must be capable of providing requisite  specificity, sensitivity, and quantitative accuracy.

D. Illegal Drug - Any drug or substance, including controlled substances, the possession of which without a prescription is defined as a violation of state or federal statutes; or any prescription drug that was not prescribed to the affected employee by a person licensed to issue such prescription.

E. Legal Drugs - Any prescription medication or any over-the-counter medication that has some medicinal value/purpose and is being used by the person for whom it was prescribed.

F. Substance Abuse - The excessive or erratic ingestion, consumption, inhalation, or injection of any illegal drug or legally obtained drug or medicine not in prescribed amounts or at proper time intervals.

G. Use of Drugs - The injection, inhalation, ingestion, or consumption of any drug, whether prescription or non-prescription, or  any controlled substance as defined under Florida law.

H. "Under the Influence" - A condition in which employees are unable to appropriately perform their duties because of  the use of any drug, controlled substance, or alcohol. Employees shall be deemed to be under the influence if they are physically or mentally impaired and/or unable to perform their duties in an acceptable manner.

B-10.4 Responsibility for Reporting Legal Drug Use

A. Sheriff's Office employees using drugs or therapeutic treatments prescribed by a physician or other authorized health practitioner shall determine from the prescribing person whether the treatment prescribed has any effects which may interfere with  the performance of their duties. If the treatment prescribed has such effects, employees shall inform their supervisors of that fact.

B. Any Sheriff's Office employee using legal over-the-counter non- prescription drugs which in any way impair or affect his/her job performance is responsible for bringing this fact to the attention of his/her immediate supervisors on Form P-004. Information relating to

the use of over-the-counter drugs can be removed at the request of the employee after it has been in the medical file for six (6) months, unless the usage of such medication is part of on-going treatment.


C. The supervisor of any employee, upon being informed that such employee is using over-the-counter or prescription drugs which could interfere with the performance of his/her duties shall make further inquiries to determine whether the employee is fit to perform those duties. Upon consultation with his/her commanding officer, the supervisor will decide whether the employee is fit for duty. If unfit, the employee shall be placed on personal leave. Should the employee and the commanding officer not concur on the ability of the employee to perform his/her duties, the department staff duty officer will make the final determination. Information regarding the use of legal drugs being taken by an employee will be forwarded to the JSO Personnel Division where it will be maintained in a confidential medical file.

D. All Sheriff's Office employees have an obligation to inform a supervisor or ranking officer if another employee is using drugs in violation of the law or Sheriff's Office Rules and Regulations.

E. If any employee knowingly ingests any drug in the performance of his/her duties, the supervisor on duty will be immediately notified and the incident reported on Form P-004. The supervisor will see that the employee is provided with immediate medical attention if necessary. The employee will be placed on an appropriate duty status. The incident will be documented with the initiation of Form P- 004 to be followed by a detailed report from the employee's commander through channels to the Sheriff. Every effort should be made to avoid such ingestion. Unless employees' lives are endangered, they will refrain from the consumption, ingestion, injection, or inhalation of a substance which may either physically or mentally be dangerous to employees.

F. Employees knowingly subjected to the passive inhalation of a drug, such as marijuana, will submit a Form P-004 to the supervisor on duty. The report will indicate the substance the individual was exposed to, the period of time exposed, and give a brief statement explaining the necessity for the exposure. The report will be forwarded to the Sheriff for review.

B-10.5 Drug Screening Program

A. The Employer shall post a notice of the department's drug testing

policy on bulletin boards in areas that are accessible to employees.

B. Urine testing of employees can be an effective means by which to identify those in need of counseling, treatment, or disciplinary action. The testing program is intended  to  supplement,  not replace, other means by which the use of drugs can be detected.


C. Employees will be required to participate in the drug  testing program under the following conditions:

(1) When there is a reasonable suspicion that an employee is using, under the influence of or in possession of illegal drugs, or is using or under the influence of alcohol while on duty, or that the employee is abusing alcohol or illegal drugs and the abuse either adversely affects his/her job performance or represents a threat to the safety of the employee, coworkers, or the public. Reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing can be ordered by any supervisor with the approval of a commanding officer. An immediate supervisor requesting a drug/alcohol test founded on reasonable suspicion should consider among such facts and inferences:

(a) Observable behavior while at work, such as direct observation of drug/alcohol use or of the physical symptoms or manifestations of being under the influence of a drug/alcohol.

(b) Abnormal conduct or erratic  behavior  while at work or a significant deterioration in work performance.

(c) A report of drug/alcohol use provided by a reliable and credible source which has been independently corroborated with observable behavior.

(d) Evidence that the employee has tampered with a drug/alcohol test during his/her employment with the Employer.

(e) Information that an employee has caused or contributed to an accident while at work combined with observable behavior indicating the possibility that drug/alcohol usage may be involved.

(f) Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs, or used or been under the influence of alcohol, while working or while on the Employer's premises or while operating the Employer's

vehicle, machinery, or equipment.

(2) Following a serious accident or incident in which safety precautions were violated or unusually careless acts were performed and there is reasonable suspicion to believe these actions were the result of using drugs.


(3) Routine fitness for duty: The Employer will require a drug test any time an employee is referred to a physician or psychologist for a fitness for duty examination.

(4) Random Drug Testing Program: As part of the Sheriff's Office random drug testing program Judicial Officers will be randomly assigned a number that will be the only source identifying the individual submitting a sample for drug testing.

(5) Follow-up testing: Should an employee in the course of employment enter, or be required by the Employer to enter, into an employee assistance program for drug-related problems, the Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test as a follow up to the program for up to two (2) years thereafter.

(6) When an employee is found  in possession of illicit drugs or when illicit drugs are found in an area controlled or used exclusively by the employee.

(7) Prior to completion of an employee's probation.

(8) As  part of a rehabilitation program  (mutually agreed  to by the affected employee and the Sheriff's  Office Administration).

(9) As a result of prior disciplinary proceedings against the employee related to the use of drugs. (Such testing shall be conducted by the Internal Affairs Unit with the approval of, and in coordination with, the JSO Chief of Personnel). The Employer may require the employee to submit to a drug test as a follow up to the disciplinary action for up to two (2) years thereafter.

B-10.6 Procedure for Testing

A. Drug testing responsibility

(1) The JSO Personnel Division shall be responsible for drug testing

of probationary Judicial Officers and employees selected through the random drug testing program.

(2) The Internal Affairs Unit shall be responsible for drug testing of any employee whom it reasonably suspects has used or is found to be in possession of a drug, or other controlled substance in violation of the law, Sheriff's Office orders, and rules and regulations. The Internal Affairs Unit shall also conduct section B-10.5(C)(5) follow up drug testing of employees and section B-10.5(C)(8) rehabilitation drug testing.


B. Confidentiality

(1) All information, interviews, reports, statements, memoranda, and drug test results, written or otherwise, received by the Employer through a drug testing program are confidential communications.

(2) The release of information obtained through any of the drug testing programs shall be solely pursuant to a written consent form signed voluntarily by the person tested except where such release is compelled by a hearing officer, a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to an appeal  taken under this section, or when required by management to determine whether to conduct a formal investigation or take disciplinary action, or for a departmental Disciplinary Hearing Board, arbitration, or Civil Service Board proceeding. Drug testing information shall also be released to the Bureau of Criminal Justice Standards and Training for the purpose of reviewing certification eligibility.
(3) Any employee authorizing the release of drug testing information must submit a signed communication to the JSO Chief of Personnel advising:
(a) The name of the person who is authorized to obtain the information,

(b) The purpose of the disclosure,

(c) The precise information to be disclosed, and

(d) The duration of the consent.

(4) The Employer may use drug test results when consulting with legal counsel in connection with actions brought under or

related to this section or where the information is relevant to the Employer's defense in a civil or administrative matter.

B-10.7 Testing Procedures

A. The Employer shall pay the cost of all drug tests which are required of employees. Employees shall pay the costs of any additional drug tests not required by the Employer.

B. Prior to taking a drug test, employees must advise the Employer of any prescription or non-prescription medications they are taking. The Employer will provide information to the employee of the most common medications by brand or common  name which may alter or affect a drug test. Employees will also be advised of all drugs for which the Employer will test, described by brand or common names, as applicable, as well as by chemical names. Information regarding the use of prescription or non-prescription drugs taken by the employee will be presented in a written communication that will be maintained in a confidential medical file in the JSO Personnel Division. The ingestion of any prescription or non-prescription drug by an employee shall not preclude the administration of the drug test, but shall be taken into account in interpreting any positive confirmed results.
C. Individuals responsible for conducting  drug  tests  are  acting  under the direct authority of the Sheriff. Employees being tested shall cooperate  fully. Any  attempt to  alter  or  tamper with  the specimen, its container,  or  any  mechanical  device,  instrument,  or  document by any individual is  grounds  for  termination  and/or  prosecution under applicable Florida Statutes.
D. The Employer will establish guidelines for the collection of drug test samples that will afford protection to the employee to include:
(1) Specimens shall be collected with due regard to the privacy of the individual providing the specimen and in a manner reasonably calculated to prevent substitution or contamination of the sample.
(2) Specimen collection shall be documented and the documentation procedures shall include:
(a) Labeling of specimen containers to reasonably preclude the likelihood of erroneous identification of test results.
(b) Specimen collection, storage, and transportation to the testing site shall be performed in a manner which will reasonably preclude specimen contamination or adulteration.


(c) The Employer shall use a chain of custody procedure to ensure the proper record keeping, handling, labeling, and identification of all specimens to be tested.
E. When an employee is required to provide specimens for a testing procedure, the employee shall provide one (1) specimen (large enough to be divided into two (2) separate samples at the time of collection in order to facilitate the testing procedures).
F. The threshold level or cut-off limit of the analytical testing procedures shall be established in accordance with the State of Florida Agency for Health Care Administration in conjunction with the standards developed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), regarding testing and protocol and procedures.

G. When employees are required to participate in any of the drug testing procedures, the initial testing specimen will be subject to an EMIT (Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique). If the results of the initial test are negative, no further testing will be done.
(1) Employees selected for random drug testing will be assigned a number which will be the only means available  of identifying the individual who provided the specimen.
(2) Random numbers assigned to employees will be maintained in a confidential file under the direct supervision of the JSO Chief of Personnel.
(3) Specimen collection will not be taken at any of the correctional housing facilities and the specimen container will not reveal the name of the contributing employee.
The Employer will use the Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) to test for the presence of alcohol in an employee's system. The test will be performed by a Certified Breath Analyzer Technician (BAT) using a EBT approved by the National Highway Safety Administration. If the initial test registers an alcohol concentration of
0.02 or greater, a confirmation test will be performed. The employee will  be placed in a separate room  under the observation of  the BAT for at least 15 minutes, but not more than 20 minutes, after which he/she will be given a confirmation EBT.
H. Random drug testing conducted by the Employer may occur before, during, or immediately after the regular work period of the employee, and shall be compensated in accordance with these guidelines.
I. The Internal Affairs Unit shall be called whenever one or more of the circumstances described in Article B-10(A)(2) comes to  the attention of members of the Sheriff's Office.

(1) Once called, the Internal Affairs Unit shall have complete authority over the investigation.

(2) The employee shall be advised in writing of the reason(s) for the order to submit to the test and that failure to do so constitutes failure to obey a direct order.

B-10.8 Results of test

A. If the results of the initial test are positive, the Employer will submit the    sample    for    a    confirmation    test    using    a    GC/MS    (Gas Chromatography/Mass    Spectrometry)    test    or    other    method specified by DHHS Guidelines to verify the initial test results that will be conducted by an outside licensed laboratory capable of

supplying an analysis of drug content. When a confirmation test is necessary, the Employer will ensure the proper storage and transportation of the specimen to a licensed laboratory for processing.
B. After receipt of a positive confirmed test result from the MRO, the Employer shall inform the employee of the positive test result, the possible consequences of such results, and the options available to the employee.
C. The Employer shall provide to the employee, upon written request, a copy of the confirmation test results.
D. All reports of positive test results shall be received by the JSO Chief of Personnel and maintained in a confidential medical file.
B-10.9 Disciplinary Procedures

A. Any employee who refuses to submit to a drug test or whose confirmation drug test is found to be positive is subject to disciplinary action. Such disciplinary action is subject to the grievance procedures provided for through Article 9 of this Agreement and the Civil Service and Personnel Rules and Regulations.
B. The employee may be either immediately suspended or reassigned pending the results of the confirmation test for the use of illegal drugs.
C. Positive confirmation tests for illegal drugs shall result in the immediate suspension of an employee which may be followed by termination proceedings. In appropriate cases, every effort will be made to help the employee deal with a legal drug problem  by proper referral to the Sheriff's Employee Assistance Program. However, if this effort fails or is obviously inappropriate given the nature of the problem, appropriate disciplinary action shall be initiated.
D. The Employer may discipline or discharge an employee on the sole basis of the employee's first positive confirmed drug test when the employee has either refused to participate in an employee assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program, as evidenced by withdrawal from the program before its completion, or a report from the program indicating unsatisfactory compliance; or by a positive test result on a confirmation test while participating in or after completion of the program.
E. The Employer shall discipline an employee, subject to termination proceedings, who has failed or refused to sign a written consent form allowing the Employer to obtain information regarding the

progress and successful completion of an employee assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program.

F. Employees participating in an employee assistance program or a drug rehabilitation program may be considered as being in a temporary limited duty status.
G. The Employer shall not discharge or discipline an employee solely upon voluntarily seeking treatment, while under the employ of the Employer, for a drug-related problem if the employee has not previously tested positive for drug use, entered an employee assistance program for drug-related problems, or entered a drug rehabilitation program. However, the Employer shall terminate an employee when the presence of illicit drugs is  confirmed. Employees who have been tested may not use this aspect of these guidelines as a means of protection from disciplinary action.

B-10.10 All laboratory reports of a drug test shall include:

A. The name and address of the laboratory which performed the test and the positive identification of the person tested (not the employee's social security number), or if applicable, the random number.

B. Positive results of confirmation tests.

C. A list of the drugs for which the drug analyses were conducted.

D. The type of tests conducted and the minimum cut-off levels of the tests.

E. Any correlation between medications reported by the employee and the confirmation test results.




Notes:

ARTICLE B-11: MATTERS NOT ADDRESSED
To the extent any provision of the Agreement reached between the City of Jacksonville and the Fraternal Order of Police,  is  not  adopted  herein  by reference, or is not specifically addressed in this Appendix B, said provision is null and of no effect as it relates to eligible employees covered by this Appendix B.




Notes:

I N D E X

SUBJECT	ARTICLE	PAGE
ACCIDENTAL DEATH BENEFITS....................................................................... 30.1 & 30.2	87
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PAY PLAN ............................................................................ 23	65
AGENT OF RECORD ............................................................................................... 29.5	83
AGREEMENT	1
ANNUAL LEAVE
ACCRUAL (PLAN E)........................................................................................ 15.2	43
ACCRUAL (PLAN P)........................................................................................ 16.2	47
APPROVAL (PLAN E) ......................................................................................... 17	49
APPROVAL (PLAN P) ......................................................................................... 17	49
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN P)........................................................................ 16.3	47
MINIMUM USAGE (PLAN P)......................................................................... 17.1(C)	49
RETIREMENT (PLAN E)...................................................................................... 15.7	45
RETIREMENT (PLAN P) ..................................................................................... 16.4	47
SELL BACK (PLAN P) ....................................................................................... 16.4	47
TERMINATION PAY (PLAN E) ............................................................................ 15.6	45
TERMINATION PAY (PLAN P) .................................................................... 16.4,16.5	47
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS (PLAN E).................................................................. 15.8	46
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS (PLAN P) ................................................................. 16.5	47
APPENDIX A	119
APPENDIX B	153
ARBITRATION ........................................................................................................... 9.7	20
AUTOMOBILE ALLOWANCE .......................................................................... 23.13, 29.2	69, 83
BILL OF RIGHTS.......................................................................................................... 11	25
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ................................................................................................ 18	53
BULLETIN BOARDS ....................................................................................................... 7	15
CALL BACK PAY..................................................................................................... 22.5	62
CLASSIFICATIONS..................................................................................................... 1.1	3
CLASSIFICATIONS.........................................................................................SCHEDULE A	109
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE ........................................................................................ 31.5	90
COLLEGE INCENTIVE .............................................................................................. 23.3	65
COMPENSATION....................................................................................................... 23	65
OVERTIME ....................................................................................................... 22	61
COMPENSATION FOR COURT RELATED MATTERS........................................................... 24	71
COURT APPEARANCE................................................................................................ 24	71
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM .................................................................... 15.5	44
DENTAL HEALTH PLAN ............................................................................................. 29.4	83
DEPENDENTS' MEDICAL INSURANCE ........................................................................ 29.3	83
DISCHARGE AND DISCIPLINE ...................................................................................... 10	23
DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND PROCEDURES, COMPREHENSIVE .......................................... 12	27
DRUG DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES .......................................................................... 12.9	36
DUES .............................................................................................................. 2.1 - 2.4	5
EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.......................................................................................... 13	39
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS .................................................................................................. 29	83
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ...................................................................... 12.3(B)	28
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE ..................................................................................... 23.6	67
EXTENDED ILLNESS ............................................................................................. 17.2(C)	51
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY........................................................................... 4.3	10

FILES ........................................................................................................................ 14	41
SUBJECT	ARTICLE	PAGE
FITNESS FOR DUTY EXAM ............................................................................................ 25	75
F.O.P. ACTIVITIES ....................................................................................................... 3	7
F.O.P. RECOGNITION................................................................................................. 1	3
F.O.P. SECURITY AND CHECK OFF ............................................................................... 2	5
F.O.P. REPRESENTATIVES .................................................................................. 1.2 - 1.3	3
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ............................................................................................ 9	19
STEP I................................................................................................................ 9.3	19
STEP II............................................................................................................... 9.4	19
STEP III .............................................................................................................. 9.5	20
STEP IV.............................................................................................................. 9.6	20
RULES ............................................................................................................... 9.8	22
ARBITRATION ..................................................................................................... 9.7	20
HEART/HYPERTENSION COVERAGE .......................................................................... 29.7 	84
HOLIDAY PAY ........................................................................................................... 21	59
HOLIDAYS ................................................................................................................ 21	59
HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME PAYMENT................................................................. 22	61
ILLEGAL DRUGS ................................................................................................ 12.3(D)	29
INJURY-IN-LINE-OF-DUTY............................................................................................ 28	81
LEAVE DONATION..................................................................................................... 19	55
LIFE INSURANCE ........................................................................................................ 30	87
LIGHT DUTY ....................................................................................................... 27.2(F)	80
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ................................................................................................ 5	11
MANAGEMENT SECURITY ............................................................................................ 4	9
MEDICAL INSURANCE............................................................................................. 29.3	83
MILITARY LEAVE ........................................................................................................ 20	57
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS .................................................................................... 35	101
OUT OF CLASS PAY ................................................................................................ 23.3	65
OVERTIME ............................................................................................................. 22.3	61
PAY DIFFERENTIAL .................................................................................................. 23.5	67
PAY INCENTIVE PLAN.............................................................................................. 23.4	66
PERSONAL LEAVE (PLAN E) ...................................................................................... 15	43
PERSONAL LEAVE (PLAN P) ..................................................................................... 16	47
ACCRUAL (PLAN E)........................................................................................ 15.2	43
ACCRUAL (PLAN P)........................................................................................ 16.2	47
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN E) ....................................................................... 15.3	43
MAXIMUM ACCRUAL (PLAN P)........................................................................ 16.3	47
MINIMUM LEAVE USAGE (PLAN E) ............................................................... 17.1(C)	49
MINIMUM LEAVE USAGE (PLAN P)............................................................... 17.1(C)	49
USAGE	(PLAN E)............................................................................................... 17	49
USAGE	(PLAN P) .............................................................................................. 17	49
PERSONAL PROPERTY DAMAGE............................................................................... 31.3	89
PHYSICAL ABILITY POLICY........................................................................................... 34	95
PHYSICAL ABILITY TESTING .....................................................................................27, 34	79, 95
POOL TIME .............................................................................................................. 3.3	7
PROMOTIONS........................................................................................................... 33	93
REASONABLE SUSPICION ........................................................................................ 12.5	31
RESIDUAL RIGHTS ...................................................................................................... 37	105
RETIREMENT LEAVE (PLAN E).................................................................................... 15.7	45
RETIREMENT LEAVE (PLAN P) ................................................................................... 16.4	47

ROLLBACK OF VACATION....................................................................................... 15.3	43

SUBJECT	ARTICLE	PAGE

SAFETY AND HEALTH .................................................................................................. 26	77
SCHEDULE A - (BARGAINING UNIT CLASSIFICATIONS)............................................... SCH A	109
SCHEDULE B - (SAMPLE MEMO FINAL ACTION REPORT) ............................................ SCH B	111
SCHEDULE C - (REQUIREMENTS FOR PAY ADVANCEMENT) ....................................... SCH C	113
SCHEDULE D - (POLICE OFFICER, POLICE OFFICER SPECIAL ASSIGNMENT,
POLICE OFFICER PILOT) ................................................................... SCH D	115
SCHEDULE E - (POLICE SERGEANT).......................................................................... SCH E	117
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT ....................................................................................... 32	91
SELLBACK OF VACATION  (PLAN E)......................................................................... 15.4	44
SELLBACK OF VACATION  (PLAN P)......................................................................... 16.3	47
SEVERABILITY ............................................................................................................ 36	103
SPECIAL MEETINGS ...................................................................................................... 6	13
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING PROCEDURE ........................................................ 12.6 - 12.7	32
SUPPLEMENTAL PAY .................................................................................................. 28	81
TEMPORARY DISABILITY .............................................................................................. 28	81
TERM OF CONTRACT ................................................................................................. 38	107
TERMINAL LEAVE BENEFITS ....................................................................................... 29.1	83
UNIFORMS & EQUIPMENT........................................................................................... 31	89
VOTING ................................................................................................................ 29.6	84
WAGES.................................................................................................................... 23	65
WITNESS DUTY ........................................................................................................ 24.3	72
WORK RULES .............................................................................................................. 8	17
WORKERS' COMPENSATION ....................................................................................... 28	81




