












MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING


BETWEEN


CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO


AND


SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION


UNIT P-2B


July 1, 2007 - June 30, 2018

Per Amendment #5


TABLE OF CONTENTS

DEFINITIONS PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I.	REPRESENTATION	1
Section 1.	Recognition	1
Section 2.	No Work Stoppages	2
Section 3.	Management Authorities	2
Section 4.	Negotiation Responsibility	2
Section 5.	Grievance Procedure	3
Section 7.	Association Security	5
Payroll Deductions	5
Maintenance of Membership	6
Agency Shop	6
Section 8.	Bulletin Boards and Distribution of Materials	8
ARTICLE II.	EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS	9
Section 1.	Non-Discrimination	9
Section 2.	Disabilities	10
Section 3.	Personnel Files	10
Section 4.	Rights of Individual Members	11
Section 5.	Access to Records of Office of Citizen Complaints	11
Section 6.	Physical Fitness Program	12
Section 7.	Pregnancy, Maternity and Family Care Leaves	13
Pregnancy Policy	13
Maternity Policy	13
Family Care Leave	13
Section 8.	Temporary Modified Duty Assignments	14
Section 9.	Seniority List	14
Section 16. Courtesy Parking System for Court Attendance	14
Section 17. District Station Parking	14
Section 19. Employee Training Reimbursement Program	14
Section 20. Medal of Valor Awards Ceremony	15
Section 20. Medal of Valor Awards Ceremony	15
II.D.	SEVERANCE PAY	18
ARTICLE III.	PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS	20
Section 1.	Wages	20
Section 2.	Overtime and Compensatory Time-Off	22
Overtime	22
Compensatory Time-Off	22
Section 3.	Holiday Compensation	22
Section 4.	Special Pays	24
Retention Pay	24
Pyramiding	25
Section 6.	Acting Assignment Pay (Like Pay for Like Work)	25
Section 7.	Uniform and Clothing Allowance	26
Section 8.	Health and Dental Coverage	26
Health Coverage	26
Dependent Health Coverage	26
Dental Coverage	27
Hepatitis B Vaccine.	28
Annual Tuberculosis Screening	28
Section 9.	Retirement	28
Mandatory Employee Retirement Contribution	28
Pre-Retirement Planning Seminar and Retirement Ceremony	29
Section 10. Wellness Programs	30
ARTICLE IV.	SCOPE	32
Section 1.	Severability	32
Section 2.	Duration	32
DEFINITIONS

City	The City and County of San Francisco.

Association	The San Francisco Police Officers' Association.

Commission	The Police Commission of the City and County of San Francisco. Day	Calendar day, unless otherwise specified.
Department	The San Francisco Police Department.

Charter	The Charter of the City and County of San Francisco.

Immediate Supervisor	The individual who immediately assigns, reviews, or directs the work
of an employee.

Intermediate Supervisor	The next higher supervisor based on the organization pattern of the
Department.

Employee	A full time peace officer within each classification listed in paragraph 1 herein, and used interchangeably with the word "officer."

Memorandum	This Memorandum of Understanding.

Watch	The period of time an employee is scheduled to be on duty.

Working Conditions	Wages, hours,   benefits   and   other   terms   and   conditions   of
employment, i.e., those matters within the scope of representation under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act.

The parties recognize that recodifications may have rendered the references to specific Civil Service Rules and Charter sections contained herein, incorrect. Therefore, the parties agree that such terms will read as if they accurately referenced the same sections in their codified form as of July 1, 2007.

PREAMBLE

This Memorandum of Understanding (hereinafter "MOU") constitutes a mutual agreement between the San Francisco Police Officers' Association (hereinafter referred to as the "Association") and the City and County of San Francisco (hereinafter referred to as the "City"), through the Office of the Mayor acting on behalf of the City and County of San Francisco, arrived at through good faith meeting and conferring pursuant to the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act and Charter Section A8.590-1, et. seq.
ARTICLE I. REPRESENTATION

Section 1.	Recognition.

    1. Pursuant to Government Code Section 3500, et. seq., the City recognizes the Association as the majority bargaining agent for sworn personnel of the San Francisco Police Department in the following bargaining unit and classifications:

P-2B Police Management Supervisory
0400
Deputy Chief
0401
Deputy Chief II
0402
Deputy Chief III
0488
Commander
0489
Commander II
0490
Commander III

    2. Active officers who obtain sufficient education and experience to meet the minimum qualifications of the ranks containing a POST certificate requirement shall be appointed to such ranks within thirty
(30) days after they present to the appointing officer evidence that they possess the POST certification required for the rank.

    3. It is the mutual understanding of the City and the Association that the compensation attached to those ranks for which a POST certificate is required is not an increase in the general rate of remuneration for the ranks or position of 0488 and/or 0400 within the meaning of the Charter of the City and County, including but not limited to Section A8.559-6.

    4. Should any retiree or other party initiate litigation challenging this mutual interpretation, and the mutual intent of these parties, and seek to obtain an adjustment of allowances for any Police Department retirees pursuant to the Charter of the City and County based upon this Agreement, the SFPOA shall fully support the defense of such claims by the City and County, and shall take appropriate legal steps to intervene in, and become party to, such litigation and in such litigation will fully support the mutual intention of the parties as described in this Agreement.

    5. The parties and each and every individual employee specifically agree and recognize that this Agreement creates no vested rights. Should any final judgment by superior court or court of competent jurisdiction at any time adjudge and decree that retirees are entitled to an adjustment of their allowances as a result of the establishment of these ranks, then the Agreement which created these ranks and set a new base rate for such ranks to be included within the rate of remuneration for pension calculation purposes shall be null and void, and shall cease immediately. If such a judgment issues, the parties further hereby agree that the base pay rate and premium of each appointee to these ranks shall retroactively revert to the then current base rate of pay and to the premium eligibility provided by the Memorandum of Understanding prior to the creation of these ranks. The parties also agree to retroactively recalculate the retirement contribution and allowance
of such officers as if this agreement had never been in effect. Provided, however, that if such a recalculation should occur, no bargaining unit employee who had received compensation based on the rates of pay for these ranks shall be obligated to pay back any monies which they had received between the effective date of their appointment and the time of such recalculation. Thereafter, the City and the Association shall mutually engage in meeting and conferring in order to reach agreement on alternative benefits.


Section 2.      No Work Stoppages.

    6. During the time this MOU is in force and effect, the Association and each member of its bargaining unit covenant and agree that she/he/it will not authorize, engage or participate in any strike, work slowdown or any form of work stoppage including but not limited to absenteeism, observing picket lines or any other form of sympathy strike.


Section 3.	Management Authorities.

    7. The City shall have authority for the policies and administration of the Department and the power to organize, reorganize and manage the Police Department and its employees. Nothing in this document shall be interpreted as abrogating the Charter in any of its parts. Said authority shall include, but not be limited to, work rules and regulations. This paragraph is not to be interpreted as a limitation on the rights of the Association under the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act.


Section 4.	Negotiation Responsibility.

    8. A. Except in cases of emergency, the City/Department shall give reasonable written notice to the Association of any proposed change in general orders or other matters within the scope of representation as specified in Government Code Section 3504.5. The Association shall be provided with the opportunity to meet and confer with regard to any such proposed change should it desire to do so.

    9. In cases of emergency when the City/Department determines that a proposed change as described herein must be adopted immediately without prior notice or meetings with the Association, the City/Department shall provide such notice and opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time following the adoption of such change.

    10. B. If the Association does not respond within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of written notification of a proposed change as described in subsection A. hereof, the Association shall be deemed to have waived its opportunity to meet and confer on the proposed change.

    11. C. If the Association timely requests the opportunity to meet and confer as provided herein, the City/Department, with the direct assistance and participation of the Employee Relations
Division, agrees to meet and confer with the Association over such proposed change or changes, within thirty (30) calendar days of such timely request, unless a longer period of time is mutually agreed upon, in order to freely exchange information, opinions and proposals and to endeavor to reach agreement on the proposed change or changes.

    12. D. If no agreement is reached, the matter shall, at the request of either party, be resolved pursuant to the impasse procedures set forth in Charter Sections A8.590-1 through A8.590-7. Staffing matters, except for current safety practices pertaining to two-officer vehicles, shall be excluded from the impasse procedures set forth in Charter Sections A8.590-1 through A8.590-7.

    13. E. Except as provided in subsection C. hereof, the Association agrees that it will make no proposals for change in the terms and conditions of employment of bargaining unit members for the duration of this Memorandum.

    14. F. This Memorandum sets forth the full and entire understanding of the parties regarding the matters set forth herein, and any and all prior and existing Memoranda of Understanding, Understandings, or Agreements, whether formal or informal, are hereby superseded or terminated in their entirety. This Memorandum may be modified, but only in writing, upon the mutual consent of the parties and ratification by the Board of Supervisors.

Section 5.	Grievance Procedure.

    15. The City and the Association recognize that early settlement of grievances is essential to sound employee-employer relations. The parties seek to establish a mutually satisfactory method for the settlement of grievances, as provided for below. In presenting a grievance, the aggrieved and/or his or her representative is assured freedom from restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination or reprisal.

    16. Grievances or disputes regarding the application or interpretation of this Agreement or relating to working conditions arising out of this Agreement, or relating to General Orders 3.08, 3.15, 11.01, 11.03, 11.05, 11.06 and 11.10, including the arbitrability thereof, shall be settled in conformity with the following procedure. Except, however, actions taken by the City that are necessary to ensure compliance with federal, state or local laws, ordinances or regulations, or that are mandated by the terms of a consent decree, shall not be grievable hereunder. After notice of such intended action by the City, the Association may however, offer in writing its view on compliance and possible alternative solutions, within ten (10) days to the Chief of Police who shall respond in writing to the Association within ten (10) business days. In addition, in the event the City acts on a matter it has reasonably determined to be mandated by or necessary to ensure compliance with a consent decree or with federal, state, or local laws, ordinances or regulations, that action shall not be grievable hereunder. In the event a grievance is filed relating to such actions, arbitrability shall be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Step I

    17. Where an employee initiates the grievance, the employee shall submit the grievance in writing to the employee’s immediate supervisor within thirty (30) days of the facts or event giving rise to the grievance. The supervisor shall attempt to adjust the grievance at the time and render a written decision within seven (7) calendar days.

Step II

    18. If the grievance is not resolved in Step I, the grievant or the Association representative shall submit the grievance in writing to the commanding officer. The grievance must be filed with the commanding officer not later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the decision by the employee from the immediate supervisor, stating the reasons why the Step I answer was not satisfactory.

    19. After review and discussion, the commanding officer shall notify the grievant(s) and the Association representative within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the grievance, in writing, of the decision and the reasons.

Step III

    20. If the grievance is not resolved in Step II, the Association representative shall submit the grievance to the Chief of Police within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the commanding officer's decision stating the reasons why the Step II answer is not satisfactory.

    21. The Chief will review the material submitted and shall hold a meeting on the grievance at the request of the Association representative on behalf of the grievant, unless the Chief is not empowered to act. The Chief shall respond in writing to the grievant, and the Association, within ten (10) working days.

Step IV

    22. If the grievance is not resolved at Step III, the Association has the right to appeal the decision of the Chief of Police to arbitration. Prior to doing so and within seven (7) calendar days, the Association shall notify the Chief of Police and the Director, Employee Relations Division or his/her designee of the Association’s decision to so appeal, and shall forward the relevant materials to the Director, Employee Relations. The Director, Employee Relations shall have twelve (12) calendar days after receipt of the written grievance to review and seek resolution of the grievance.

    23. If the Director, Employee Relations is unable to resolve the grievance to the mutual satisfaction of the parties in the time prescribed, the grievance may then be submitted only by the Association to arbitration.
    24. The arbitrator shall be an impartial person selected by mutual consent of the parties. If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of the Employee Relations Division’s response, the parties shall select an arbitrator from a list of seven (7) names from the California State Mediation and Conciliation Service.

    25. The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the parties. The Arbitrator shall not have the right to alter, amend, delete or add to any of the terms of this Agreement.

    26. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this MOU, disciplinary or punitive actions described in Charter Section 8.343 cannot be grieved or arbitrated. An arbitrator selected pursuant hereto shall have no authority to hear or decide any such disciplinary or punitive actions.

    27. An Arbitrator selected pursuant to this Agreement shall have no power or authority to alter or supersede the Charter, the Civil Service Commission rules, the Administrative Code or the Federal Consent Decree.

    28. The parties shall share the jointly-incurred costs of the arbitration proceedings. Each party shall in good faith divulge to the other party all available material facts at the time said party acquires knowledge thereof concerning the matter in dispute.

    29. Nothing herein shall restrict the right of the City or the Department to initiate grievances under this Agreement. In such instance, only Steps III and IV shall be applicable prior to the determination to proceed to arbitration.

Expedited Arbitration

    30. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the parties may by mutual agreement agree to submit a particular grievance to expedited arbitration. Expedited arbitration may include, by the agreement of the parties:

        1. time-limited argument;
        2. waiver of court reporter and/or transcript;
        3. closing arguments in lieu of briefs;
        4. bench decision by the arbitrator; and
        5. such other expedited procedures as the parties deem advisable for the case at hand.


Section 6.	Association.

    A. Payroll Deductions.

    31. The Association shall provide the Employee Relations Director and the City Controller with a complete list of the City classifications subject to this section represented by the Association, a statement of the membership dues for employees in each classification, and a list of employees
in said classification who have signed authorizations for payroll dues deductions. Such list of represented classifications and statement of membership dues shall be amended as necessary. The Controller may take up to thirty (30) days to implement such changes. The Controller shall make required membership dues payroll deductions for the Association as designated from the list submitted by the Association. The Association shall pay the reasonable costs of this service. Such costs shall be established by the Controller of the City and County of San Francisco.

    32. Effective the first complete pay period commencing after the receipt of dues authorization deduction forms by the Controller and each pay period thereafter, the Controller shall make membership dues deductions, as appropriate, from the regular periodic payroll warrant of each POA member described above.

    B. Maintenance of Membership.

    33. Employees covered by this MOU who have voluntarily joined the Association, and have authorized payroll deduction of dues, initiation fees, premiums for insurance programs and political action fund contributions, shall, for the administrative convenience of the parties, be permitted to revoke authorization for the deduction of Association dues only during the month of May for any year. Any request for such revocation shall be delivered in person to the Office of the Controller or may be sent by U.S. mail to the Controller, whose current address is 875 Stevenson Street, San Francisco, CA 94103. The City shall deliver a copy of any revocation notice to the Association not later than July 1.

    C. Agency Shop.

    34. 1. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all police officers of bargaining unit P-1.

    35. 2. Implementation. An agency shop shall be implemented within representation units or subunits when:

    a. Election

    36. The Union has requested, in writing, an election on the issue, to be conducted by the State Conciliation Service and 50% plus one of those voting favor implementation of an agency shop, or

    b. 2/3 Membership

    37. The Union makes a showing that 2/3 of the employees within the unit or subunit are dues-paying members of the Union, or
    c. New Employees

    38. The Union requests, in writing, an agency shop be implemented for all employees hired after a date to be agreed to by the Union and the Employee Relations Division.

    39. 3. Service Fee. All police officers of bargaining unit P-1 except as set forth below, shall, as a condition of continued employment, become and remain a member of the Association, or in lieu thereof, shall pay a service fee to the Association. The fair share service fee payment shall be established annually by the Association, provided that such fair share agency shop service fee will be used by the Association only for the purposes permitted by law. The Association shall give all non-member employees of affected bargaining units written notice of their obligation to either join or pay an agency shop fee as a condition of employment. After such notice and a time period agreed to by the parties, service fees from non-members shall be collected by payroll deduction pursuant to Administrative Code Section l6.90. Failure to comply with this section shall be grounds for termination. The Association, at its option, may elect to waive its rights to demand termination and instead utilize judicial process to compel payment.

    40. 4. Financial Reporting. Annually, the Association will provide an explanation of the fee and sufficient financial information to enable the fair share service fee payer to gauge the appropriateness of the fee. The Association will provide a reasonably prompt opportunity to challenge the amount of the fee before an impartial decision-maker, not chosen by the Association, and will make provision for an escrow account to hold amounts reasonably in dispute while challenges are pending.

    41. 5. Religious Exemption. Any employee covered by this provision who is a member of a bona fide religion, body or sect that has historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially supporting a public employee organization and is recognized by the National Labor Relations Board to hold such objections to labor union membership shall, upon presentation of membership and historical objection, be relieved of any obligation to pay the required service fee. The Association shall be informed in writing of any such requests.

    42. 6. Payment of Sums Withheld. Nine (9) working days following payday, the City will promptly pay over to the Association, less the fee for making such deductions, all sums withheld for membership or service fees. The City shall also provide with each payment a list of employees paying such service fees.

    43. 7. Indemnification. The Association agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless for any loss or damage arising from the operation of this section.

    44. 8. The Union shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chicago Teachers Union v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292 (1986) for the deduction of agency shop fees. Annually, the Union shall certify in writing to the City that the content of the written notice meets the requirements set forth in this section and in Hudson.



Section 7.	Bulletin Boards and Distribution of Materials.

    45. A reasonable amount of space on bulletin boards within police buildings shall be made available for the dissemination of Association literature. All literature shall be dated, shall be identified by affiliation and author, and shall be neatly displayed, and removed from said bulletin board when no longer timely. The Department agrees that Association literature shall not be removed from said bulletin boards without first consulting with the station, bureau, or unit representative of the Association to determine if the literature should remain for an additional period of time. The Department is authorized to remove any literature not posted within the specific limits of this section upon notifying the affected Association representative.

    46. Distribution of Association literature by any Association member shall be done so as not to interfere with or interrupt the performance of official police duties.
ARTICLE II. EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS

Section 1.	Non-Discrimination.

    47. The City and the Association agree that no person employed or applying for employment shall in any way be discriminated against because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical handicap, age, political affiliation or opinion, gender identity or sexual orientation, nor shall such a person be the subject of sexual or racial harassment. This paragraph shall not be construed to restrict or proscribe voluntary affirmative action efforts by the Department; nor shall any rule, policy, procedure, order, action, determination or practice taken to ensure compliance with the purpose, goals, or requirements of a consent decree be restricted by the provisions of this paragraph.

    48. This section is not intended to affect the right of an employee to elect any applicable administrative remedy for discrimination proscribed herein. Provided, however, the parties agree that an employee may elect only one administrative remedy, except as provided in paragraph 52. It is understood that this paragraph shall not foreclose the election by an affected employee of any administrative or statutory remedy provided by law.

    49. The parties recognize that in a disciplinary proceeding, or any other context in which EEO issues are administratively determined by the City or the police department, the City does not represent individual police officers. Accordingly, the parties recognize the Association has a duty to fairly represent all of its members and that this duty applies to POA members who are complainants in discrimination cases, as well as to POA members who may be accused of discriminatory conduct.

    50. Neither the City nor the Association shall interfere with, intimidate, restrain, coerce or discriminate against any employee because of the exercise of rights granted pursuant to the Meyers-Milias- Brown Act.

    51. An employee who elects an administrative remedy other than the grievance procedure contained in this MOU for discrimination proscribed herein, and whose complaint is not resolved within thirty
(30) days, shall have the right to seek relief in accord with the grievance procedure. In such instances, the employee may initiate his/her grievance at Step III.

    52. It is understood and agreed that any disciplinary action against an employee that may be initiated or result from the application or interpretation of these provisions shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration provisions of Article I, Section 5 of this Agreement. Any action grieved pursuant to this section and determined to be violative thereof may be set aside by the Chief of the Department or the Police Commission.
Section 2.	Disabilities.

    53. The parties agree that they are required to provide reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities in order to comply with the provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act (“ADA”), the Fair Employment and Housing Act (“FEHA”) and all other applicable federal, state and local disability anti-discrimination statutes and further agree that this Memorandum will not be interpreted, administered or applied in any manner which is inconsistent with said statutes. The City reserves the right to take any action necessary to comply therewith.


Section 3.	Personnel Files.

    54. The City shall maintain personnel files for each employee. Employees or their authorized representatives have the right to examine the contents of their master personnel files maintained by the Personnel Division during business hours Monday through Friday excluding legal holidays. Adverse comments may not be placed in the employees’ master personnel files without the employees’ having acknowledged notice of the adverse comments on the face of the document prior to placement of the comments in the files. Employees may cause to be placed in their master personnel files responses to adverse material inserted therein and a reasonable amount of correspondence as determined by the Chief originating from other sources directly related to their job performance may be placed in employees’ master personnel files.

    55. Only persons authorized by the Commanding Officer of the Personnel Division may review an employee’s master personnel file.

    56. This section regarding employee access and authorized review applies to materials contained in files of cases classified as improper conduct in the Management Control Division and EEO Unit after the Chief determines to proceed with disciplinary action. All other access to the files at the Management Control Division and EEO Unit must be pursuant to a valid discovery motion filed and approved by the Police Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction except as provided in subsection D. below regarding sealed reprimands except where access is deemed by the City to pertain to investigations, EEO compliance, Consent Decrees or other legal or administrative proceedings.

    57. Formal reprimands without further penalty will not be considered for purposes of promotion, transfer or special assignments after the formal reprimand has been in the employee’s personnel file for two (2) years or after the earlier of the two time periods listed below has elapsed:

    58. 1.   not later than three (3) years from the date the complaint against the officer is filed, absent requests for hearing, appeals, delays requested by the employee or the Union, and the tolling of time periods under Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act (POBR); or
    59. 2.     not later than two (2) years from the notice of the intent to reprimand, absent requests for hearing, appeals, delays requested by the employee or the Union, and the tolling of time periods under POBR

    60. Formal reprimands with additional penalty more than five (5) years old will not be considered for purposes of promotion, transfer or special assignments.

    61. All officers shall have the right to review their master personnel file and identify all such documents. Upon concurrence of the Commanding Officer of Personnel that such documents have been appropriately identified, they will be placed in an envelope, sealed and initialed by the officer. The envelope will be placed in the officer's personnel file and will be opened only in the event that the officer is in the future subject to discipline or access is deemed by the City to pertain to investigations, EEO compliance, Consent Decrees or other legal or administrative proceedings.


Section 4.	Rights of Individual Employees.

    62. An employee may not be disciplined or subjected to punitive action without written notice of the disciplinary action. The employee is entitled to receive a copy of the charges and material upon which the disciplinary action is based. This provision shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure set forth in this Agreement.

    63. The Employer agrees to use the principle of progressive discipline in the application of punitive action where appropriate. The Employer is not precluded from imposing suspension and/or termination if the facts so indicate without first imposing lesser forms of punitive action. This provision shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure set forth in this Agreement.

    64. The Department shall not subject an employee to examination by the Police Physician without informing the employee of the underlying reasons for the examination. Employees are entitled to have a person of the same sex designated by the Chief of Police present during any examination by the Police Physician. An employee may seek an opinion of another physician of his/her choice and at his/her own expense and this supplemental report of such physician is to be submitted to the Police Physician. The Police Physician must consider the supplemental information in making his recommendation to the Chief. The employee is entitled to receive a copy of the recommendation of the Police Physician’s final report. The Chief of Police will make the final decision as to the recommendation filed by the Police Physician.


Section 5.	Access to Records of Office of Citizen Complaints.

    65. It is agreed that a complainant's Office of Citizen Complaints (OCC) complaint form shall be released to the complainant upon request.
    66. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Memorandum of Understanding, in the event an OCC investigative hearing is determined to be appropriate and is scheduled, the affected employee and the complainant, prior to said hearing and upon seventy-two (72) hours' advance notice, shall have access to all evidence not deemed to be confidential pursuant to the Police Commission rules. Such access shall consist of inspection of materials and, upon request, copies of materials for use by the employee and the complainant.

    67. Review and receipt of evidence shall be permitted only upon the execution by the requesting party and his or her representative of a confidentiality statement approved by the Police Commission. The Police Commission shall monitor the application of this paragraph and shall implement policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance herewith.

    68. Summary disposition reports, the format of which shall be set by the Police Commission and which shall include a brief description of the complaint and summary findings of fact, shall be prepared by the OCC in matters that are not sustained, as well as in those matters which are disposed of by the Chief of Police and do not result in a Police Commission hearing. These reports shall be available for public review and disclosure. Such reports shall not contain the name(s) of the complainant(s) nor of the charged officer(s) nor contain any information which would (a) deprive a person of the right to a fair trial or an impartial adjudication; (b) disclose investigative techniques and procedures deemed confidential by the Police Commission; (c) disclose confidential information when disclosure is prohibited by any law; (d) endanger the life or physical safety of any person, including but not limited to, law enforcement personnel; or (e) result in an unnecessary invasion of the personal privacy of an individual.

    69. The OCC, in conjunction with the Police Commission, shall develop procedures which may utilize face-to-face dispute resolution in appropriate cases. Use of these procedures will be voluntary and subject to the veto power of the OCC for the complainant or the affected employee.

    70. Disputes regarding this section shall be resolved by utilization of existing rules and regulations and shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure contained in this Memorandum of Understanding.


Section 6.	Physical Fitness Program.

    71. The physical fitness program as set forth in General Order 11.10 and as outlined in the Physical Fitness Program Information Booklet (revised July, 1993) shall remain in effect, and shall be available to all employees covered under this MOU.
Section 7.	Pregnancy, Maternity and Family Care Leaves.

    A. Pregnancy Policy.

    72. The medical opinion of the employee’s attending physician as to the length of time the employee can perform full duty without danger due to pregnancy will be honored subject to Civil Service Commission Rules.

    73. At the time the attending physician notifies the Department in writing requesting limited duty status for the pregnant employee, the employee will be released to limited duty consistent with Department policy.

    74. Pregnant employees may wear their civilian clothing or, with the approval of the Department, a uniform modified for pregnancy. There is no official Department maternity wear.

    75. Vacation and sick leave with pay may be taken by the pregnant officer at any time up to amount accumulated and consistent with Department and Civil Service Rules governing the use of such time.

    B. Maternity Policy.

    76. Maternity leave is the right of every employee in accordance with Civil Service Commission Rules. Attached for informational purposes only as Appendix A is Civil Service Rule 220 (in part) dealing with leaves of absence (general requirements) and sick leave (sick leave - maternity).

    77. The starting date for maternity leave is a decision of the employee and her doctor.

    78. The return date from maternity is a decision of the employee and her doctor.

    79. The employee has the right to include vacation time in maternity leave.

    80. When an employee returns to work from her maternity leave, she will be reinstated to her original job (same location and shift) as assigned to her on the start date of her maternity leave.

    C. Family Care Leave.

    81. Family care leave shall be granted to employees in accordance with Civil Service Commission Rule 220.

    82. An employee’s return to work from family care leave shall be governed by the existing practices of the Department with respect to all other leaves of absence.
Section 8.	Temporary Modified Duty Assignments.

    83. Temporary modified duty assignments shall be administered in accordance with the revised General Order 11.12. The parties agree that, except for matters related to compensation while engaged in temporary modified duty assignments, decisions made pursuant to General Order 11.12 shall not be grievable under the parties’ MOU.

For reference, General Order 11.12 is incorporated herein as Appendix B.


Section 9.	Seniority List.

    84. The Department shall establish a master seniority list comprised of all employees by Civil Service rank, which shall be maintained on a current basis, and which shall be posted each year from January 1 until December 31 in each district station, bureau and unit, in conspicuous places, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the Secretary of the Association. Objections to the seniority list shall be reported to the Chief on or before January 15 of each year.

    85. All objections shall be considered on their merits and appropriate actions shall be promptly taken.


Section 10.	Courtesy Parking System for Court Attendance.

    86. The Department agrees to maintain the current courtesy parking system for employees while attending court as a result of a subpoena on behalf of or in defense of the City or the Department when attendance is in the Hall of Justice.


Section 11.	District Station Parking.

    87. The City will make a reasonable effort to provide adequate parking to employees at the district stations.


Section 12.	Employee Training Reimbursement Program.

    88. Employees covered by this MOU shall have access to the Employee Tuition Reimbursement Program provided under POA Units P-1 and P-2A MOU.

    89. Subject to available monies, an employee may submit a request for tuition reimbursement up to five-hundred dollars ($500) during each fiscal year.
Section 13.	Medal of Valor Awards Ceremony.

    90. The City acknowledges the authority of the Police Commission to honor bargaining unit members with formal awards for outstanding service, above and beyond the call of duty. Such awards shall include, but are not limited to, Medals of Valor, Meritorious Conduct and Police Commission Commendations. Such awards shall be presented at an awards ceremony. The cost of each ceremony shall not exceed $3,000 and the cost per Fiscal Year shall not exceed $6,000.


Section 14.	Recruitment.

    91. An officer who refers a new applicant to the department shall receive a referral bonus of $1,000 ($500 upon that candidate’s successful completion of the Police Academy and an additional $500 upon that candidate’s successful completion of field training). To qualify, the referring officer must verify that he/she has made at least three contacts with the applicant prior to the start date of the Academy. Officers assigned to recruitment on a full or part-time basis will not be eligible for the referral bonus. For purposes of this provision, a “new applicant” is an individual who has not previously applied to be a Cadet or a Police Officer in San Francisco. This provision shall sunset on June 30, 2013 and no new referrals thereafter shall qualify for the bonus.

    92. This bonus is not considered “salary attached to the rank” and shall not be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations and contributions in accordance with those Sections.


Section 15.	Substance Abuse Testing.

    93. It is the policy of the City and County of San Francisco to maintain a safe, healthful and productive work environment for all employees. To that end, the City will act to eliminate any substance abuse. Substance abuse may include abuse of alcohol, illegal drugs, prescription drugs or any other substance which could impair an employee’s ability to safely and effectively perform the functions of the particular job.

    94. This provision will be administered consistent with any General Orders regarding substance abuse. Nothing in this provision is intended to make discipline related to substance abuse subject to the grievance procedure.

    A. Mandatory Testing

    95. Mandatory physical examinations for sworn employees shall include the submission of a urine specimen for routine analysis and screening for the presence of drugs or alcohol. Analysis and screening for drugs and alcohol is required for sworn employees in the following circumstances:

        1. Prior to the expiration of a newly hired employee’s twelve (12) month probationary period.

        2. For employees being promoted to a higher rank, prior to the effective date of promotion.

        3. Prior to return from:

a.)	medical leaves of absence in excess of thirty (30) calendar days, and b.)	unpaid leaves of absence in excess of ninety (90) calendar days.
        4. When a pattern of sick leave develops which indicates a reasonable suspicion of substance abuse.

        5. When there is reasonable suspicion that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol while on duty.

        6. In the event an employee is involved in an on-duty vehicular accident resulting in death or an injury requiring transport for medical treatment. In such cases the employee will have the option for either a blood or urine analysis and screening. An “injury requiring transport for medical treatment” is an injury that results in the medical transport by ambulance of any person involved in the accident from the accident scene; or an injury to any person involved in the accident where that person declines transport by ambulance from the accident scene against medical advice (also known as “AMA”). If testing is required under this section, the SFPD shall direct the involved SFPD vehicle operator to undergo testing within twelve (12) hours of the time of the accident, and shall conduct testing of the involved SFPD vehicle operator within twenty four (24) hours of the time of the accident. If testing is not directed and conducted within these time periods (assuming no interference by the SFPD vehicle operator that delays the SFPD’s directive or testing), testing of the involved SFPD operator is not required or permitted under this paragraph.

    B. Reasonable Suspicion

    96. Reasonable suspicion as used within this section is defined as a belief based on objective and articulable facts sufficient to lead a reasonable supervisor to suspect that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol, such that the employee’s ability to perform the functions of the job safely and effectively is impaired or reduced.

    97. Reasonable suspicion as used within this section is defined as a belief based on objective and articulable facts sufficient to lead a reasonable supervisor to suspect that an employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol, such that the employee’s ability to perform the functions of the job safely and effectively is impaired or reduced.

        1. Examples of situations in which there may be reasonable suspicion include but are not limited to:

            a. A pattern of documented abnormal or erratic behavior;

            b. The direct observation of drug or alcohol use; or a report by a reliable and credible source that an employee has engaged in drug or alcohol use, the identity of which source shall be available to the employee and the Union;

            c. The presence of the mental or physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use (e.g., glassy or bloodshot eyes, alcohol odor on breath, slurred speech, poor coordination and/or reflexes, etc.); or

            d. A work-related incident in conjunction with other facts which together support reasonable cause.

    C. Employee Responsibilities

    98. An employee must not:

        1. report to work while his/her ability to perform job duties is impaired due to alcohol or drug use;

        2. possess or use, or have the odor of alcohol or drugs on his/her breath during working hours; or

        3. directly or through a third party sell or provide drugs or alcohol to any person or to any other employee while either employee is on duty or on paid stand-by.

    99. An employee must:

        1. submit immediately to requests for alcohol and/or drugs analysis when requested by an authorized representative of the department director, or designee, and may request union representation;

        2. notify his/her supervisor before operating City equipment when taking any medications or drugs, prescription or non-prescription, which may create an unsafe or dangerous situation for the public or the employee’s co-workers, including but not limited to Valium, muscle relaxants, and painkillers; and

        3. provide, within 24 hours of request, a current valid prescription in the employee’s name for any drug or medication identified when a drug screen/analysis is positive.

    100. D. Management Responsibilities and Guidelines

        1. Managers and supervisors are responsible for consistent enforcement of this provision.

        2. The Department may request that an employee submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis when a manager or supervisor has a reasonable suspicion that an employee is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol.

        3. Managers and supervisors shall document in writing the facts constituting reasonable suspicion that the employee in question is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.

        4. Managers and supervisors shall not physically search employees without consent or a valid warrant.

        5. Managers and supervisors shall not confiscate, without consent, prescription drugs or medications from an employee who has a prescription.

        6. One of the supervisory employees who made the reasonable suspicion determination shall inform the employee of the requirement that he/she undergo testing in a confidential manner.

Section 16.	Severance Pay

    101. 1. The City agrees that when involuntarily removing or releasing from employment a represented, exempt employee, the Appointing Officer will endeavor to inform the employee at least thirty (30) calendar days before his/her final day of work. Where the Appointing Officer fails or declines to inform the employee a full thirty (30) days in advance, the member shall receive pay in lieu of the number of days less than thirty (30) upon which she/he was informed.

    102. 2. In addition to paragraph (1), the City agrees that when involuntarily removing or releasing from employment a represented, exempt employee with ten (10) or more years of City Service, the employee shall also receive one month’s severance pay in exchange for a release signed by the employee and POA of any and all claims arising under this Agreement that the employee or POA may have against the City including any officer or employee thereof. This release shall also include a waiver of any rights the employee may have to return to City employment, e.g., holdover roster. This release does not affect claims or rights an employee may have independent of this Agreement such as those rights arising under state or federal law.

    103. 3.   In the event a represented, exempt employee is involuntarily returned to a permanent job code (rank), that employee may elect to separate from City Service and shall receive one month’s severance pay in exchange for a release signed by the employee and POA of any and all claims arising under this Agreement that the employee or POA may have against the City including any officer or employee thereof. This release shall also include a waiver of any rights the employee may have to return to City employment e.g. holdover roster. This
release does not affect claims or rights an employee may have independent of this Agreement such as those rights arising under state or federal law.
ARTICLE III. PAY, HOURS AND BENEFITS

Section 1.	Wages.

A.	General Wage Increases:

    104. Employees shall receive the following base wage increases:

July 1, 2015 – 1%
July 1, 2016 – 2%
July 1, 2017 – 2%

104a. The parties acknowledge that covered employees previously deferred to January 8, 2011 a 2% wage increase that was originally scheduled to be effective on July 1, 2009.

104aa.  Employees shall defer to July 1, 2012, the 2% wage increase which is scheduled to be effective on March 31, 2012. Such deferral is subject to the terms set forth in section 104b.

104b.  In the event that any of the circumstances set forth below in subsection (1) occur during any of the economic concession periods set forth in paragraph 104c, the economic concessions described in paragraphs 104, 104aa, 115a, and 143a shall terminate at the close of business on the last day of the applicable economic concession period and no subsequent economic concessions shall become effective during the term of this Agreement:

1)		a City Charter amendment (other than a retirement benefits ballot measure adopted by the voters in the November 2011 election) or State ballot measure or State legislation is implemented by the City during any economic concession period set forth in paragraph 104c, resulting in any reduction in represented employee wages or fringe benefits; In such event, the parties will thereafter meet and confer in good faith regarding the impact of any such Charter amendment, State ballot measure or State legislation, pursuant to Government Code section 3505 and Charter section A8.590 et seq.
104c.	Economic Concession periods are as follows:

(1) July 1, 2010 to December 24, 2010.
(2) December 25, 2010 to June 30, 2011.
(3) July 1, 2011 to December 23, 2011.
(4) December 24, 2011 to June 30, 2012.
    (5) July 1, 2012 to December 21, 2012
    (6) December 22, 2012 to June 30, 2013
104d. In the event that the City’s FY 2011-2012 Joint Report, issued on or about March 30, 2011, projects the General Fund deficit in FY 2011-2012 to be less than $261 million dollars, then the parties shall reopen the contract to determine whether the economic concession for FY 2011-12 should be adjusted and, if so, by what amount.

104e.   Effective July 1, 2011, employees shall receive a base wage increase in an amount equal to 100% of the difference between the average total amount of all survey data points and the comparable total amount for San Francisco Police Officers. However, this base wage increase shall be no lower than 3% and no higher than 5%.

104f. A survey shall be conducted by the City of the following cities: Berkeley, Concord, Daly City, Fairfield, Fremont, Hayward, Oakland, Richmond, San Jose, Santa Clara and Santa Rosa.

104g.  The salary survey shall measure total compensation for the rank of Q2 Police Officer based on the following data points:

        ◦ Maximum monthly salary for the rank of Q2 Police Officer;
        ◦ Maximum educational incentive premiums (e.g., Adv. POST);
        ◦ Employer payment of mandatory employee retirement contributions and retirement supplements;
        ◦ Uniform Pay
104h. The salary survey shall be completed no later than May 15, 2011 for the base wage adjustment effective on July 1, 2011. The rates reported for the cities listed above shall be those known and officially authorized for payment as of May 15, 2011 for July 1, 2011. If rates are not known and authorized by May 15, 2011 for July 1, 2011, the rates reported shall be those in effect on May 15, 2011. Authorized rates to be surveyed are those contained in resolutions, ordinances, charters or memoranda of understanding.

104i. For memoranda of understanding or other authorizing salary instruments that provide for CPI adjustments, the minimum adjustment, if provided, shall be utilized as the rate effective on the date of the market wage adjustment. If no minimum adjustment is provided, the rates used shall be those in effect when the survey is conducted.

104j. The parties shall consult regarding the survey results. Any disputes regarding the results of the survey or its methodology shall be submitted to Expedited Arbitration under the Grievance Procedure.

104k. The surveyed data shall be reported by each city and for each category, and as an average. The difference between the average total amount of all survey data points and the total amount for San Francisco Police Officers for the identical data points shall be calculated as a percentage and the difference, if any, shall be the basis for the base wage adjustment.

104l. The parties acknowledge and understand that the wage-setting process set forth herein was reached by mutual agreement and is intended to determine wages only during the term of this Agreement. The parties further acknowledge and understand that this wage setting process shall sunset upon expiration of this Agreement and that the terms and conditions of employment contained in successor MOUs, including wages, shall be determined pursuant to Charter Section A8.590, et. seq.


Section 2.	Overtime and Compensatory Time-Off.

    A. Overtime

    105. The parties acknowledge that deputy chiefs and commanders are exempt from the application of the FLSA as permitted by 29 USC Section 213.

    106. Employees covered by this MOU are frequently required to work in excess of forty (40) hours per week to perform the job duties of their positions. In recognition of this work requirement, on July 1, 2007, employees will receive a four percent (4%) wage increase in lieu of earning overtime or compensatory time off. This provision shall not preclude employees from earning compensation as defined in Section 10B of the Administrative Code.

    107. Employees shall not be eligible for 10B assignments during hours on SP, VA, FH, In-Lieu, or DP.

    B. Compensatory Time-Off

    108. 1. Deputy chiefs and commanders with existing compensatory time off balances in excess of 480 hours as of June 30, 2003 may continue to carry such balances provided that such balances may not exceed 1500 hours as of June 30, 2005, and 1300 hours as of June 30, 2007. For those occupying these ranks, compensatory time-off balances in excess of these amounts on the dates set forth shall be forfeited.

    109. 2.   The City has the right to pay-off accrued compensatory time off above 480 hours at its discretion, so long as such a pay off is uniform. Employees that involuntarily revert to a lower rank and do not elect severance pay as provided herein shall, at their request, have up to their entire compensatory time off bank paid out at the higher rank.


Section 3.	Holidays.

    110. A. Employees are entitled to the following holidays each year with pay:
New Year's Day	Fourth of July Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday	Labor Day Columbus Day	Thanksgiving Day
Veteran's Day	The Day after Thanksgiving
Presidents’ Day	Christmas Day
Memorial Day	Four (4) Floating Holidays each fiscal year

110a. In lieu of wage increases for Fiscal Year 2012-2013, officers shall receive four (4) additional (one-time) Floating Holidays on July 1, 2012 and four (4) additional (one-time) Floating Holidays close of business on June 30, 2013. Notwithstanding paragraph 120 below, any unused floating holidays accrued from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2012 may be carried over to be used in FY 2012-13, FY 2013-14 and FY 2014-15.

    111. In addition, included shall be any day declared to be a holiday by proclamation of the Mayor after such day has heretofore been declared a holiday by the Governor of the State of California or the President of the United States.

    112. The above floating holidays are to be taken on days selected by the employee subject to the approval of the Department which shall not be unreasonably withheld. No compensation of any kind shall be earned or granted for floating holidays not taken. Floating holidays received in one fiscal year but not used may be carried forward to the next succeeding fiscal year. The number of floating holidays carried forward to a succeeding fiscal year may not exceed the total number of floating holidays received in the previous fiscal year. Floating holidays may be taken in hourly increments up to and including the number of hours contained in the employee’s regular shift.

    113. B. Employees working a work week other than Monday through Friday shall be allowed another day off if a holiday falls on one of their regularly scheduled days off. Employees whose holidays are changed because of shift rotations shall be allowed another day off if a legal holiday falls on one of their days off.

    114. C. If the provisions of this section deprive any employee of the same number of holidays that an employee receives who works Monday through Friday, he/she shall be granted additional days off to equal such number of holidays. The designation of such days off shall be by mutual agreement of the employee and the appropriate supervisor with the approval of the appointing officer. In no event shall the provisions of this section result in such employee receiving more or less holidays than an employee on a Monday through Friday work schedule.

    115. D. This section shall not modify existing holiday compensation practice.

115a.   E.	Mandatory Unpaid Floating Holidays

    a. Officers shall each receive six (6) mandatory floating holidays to be used in Fiscal Year 2010-2011 or thereafter; thus, officers shall contribute the value of
six such floating holidays for Fiscal Year 2010-2011. The reduction in pay associated with these unpaid days will be “smoothed” over the course of the fiscal year. Six (6) unpaid days equates to a wage reduction of 2.31%.

    b. Officers shall each receive four (4) mandatory floating holidays to be used in Fiscal Year 2011-2012 or thereafter; thus, officers shall contribute the value of four such floating holidays for Fiscal Year 2011-2012. The reduction in pay associated with these unpaid days will be “smoothed” over the course of the fiscal year. Four (4) unpaid days equates to a wage reduction of 1.54%.

    c. All mandatory unpaid floating holidays for Fiscal Year 2010-2011 and Fiscal Year 2011-2012 must be used prior to any use of vacation time; provided, however, that this limitation (i.e. use of such floating holidays before vacation) will not apply to employees at the point at which they would otherwise cease to accrue vacation because they will reach the accrual maximums.


Section 4.	Special Pays.

    116. Special pay shall be provided to employees as follows:

    A. Retention Pay

    117. Employees who have completed twenty-three (23) years or more of service as a sworn member of the Department or Airport Bureau shall receive 2% retention pay. Retention pay shall be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations and contributions. Further, it is the parties’ understanding that this benefit is part of the salary attached to all ranks for employees who have completed twenty-three (23) years or more of sworn service covered by this Agreement.

    118. Eligible employees who have completed thirty (30) years or more of service as a sworn member of the Department or Airport Bureau shall receive an additional 4% (6% total) retention pay for each pay period during which they are eligible. Eligibility is subject to the following conditions and limitations:

        1. employees must have worked and continue to work (regular paycode ‘WK’) not less than seventeen-hundred (1,700) hours in an on-going, consecutive (rolling) twelve (12) month period; and

        2. employees that have been issued a suspension of thirty (30) or more days during the preceding twelve (12) months shall not be eligible.
    119. Retention pay shall be included for purposes of retirement benefit calculations and contributions. It is the parties’ understanding that this benefit is part of the salary attached to all ranks for employees who completed the above defined conditions.

119a.	Use of mandatory unpaid floating holidays under paragraph 115a, will count as “time worked” for determining eligibility for retention pay under paragraph 118 (1).

    B. Pyramiding

    120. There shall be no pyramiding of premiums in this section.

    C. Wage Adjustment

    121. Effective July 1, 2007, a one-time adjustment of one percent (1%) shall be included in the base rate of pay, reflecting the provisions of Article III, Section 4(J) of the 2003-2007 MOU.


Section 6.	Acting Assignment Pay (Like Pay for Like Work).

    122. Eligibility for acting assignment pay will be determined as follows:

    123. A. Employees assigned by the Chief of Police or designee to perform the full range of essential functions of a position in a higher jobcode (rank) shall receive the compensation of the higher jobcode.

    124. B. An employee entitled to receive acting assignment pay compensation must complete a “Compensation Request/Equal Pay” (SFPD 319) card for the hours actually worked and submit the card to Payroll by the end of the pay period.
    125. C. The completed card must include the name and rank of the person replaced, if any, the beginning and ending dates and times of the acting assignment pay status and the actual dates circled on the back of the card. or in accordance with any automated or alternative procedures established by the Police Department.

    126. D. Upon designation by the Chief of the Department that an assignment shall be for longer than thirty (30) calendar days, the employee performing the duties of a higher rank shall receive the compensation of the higher rank for the duration of the assignment
(including paid leave).

    127. All of the above conditions must be met before acting assignment compensation can be approved. In the normal absence of a superior officer, the senior ranking officer on duty will be in charge, but will not be expected to perform the duties of the higher rank.
Section 7.	Uniform and Clothing Allowance.

    128. Employees shall receive, as part of their regular rate of pay, eight-hundred and twenty dollars ($820.00) per year as an annual uniform allowance. In exchange for this additional compensation, employees shall be responsible for the maintenance, care and replacement of the following standard uniform items: shirts, pants, shoes, jumpsuits, BDUs and regular raingear.

    129. Newly hired recruit officers shall not be entitled to the annual uniform allowance for the first year of service. Such recruit officers shall continue to be supplied with an initial set of uniforms.

    130. Other safety equipment and uniform items, including specialized raingear and boots worn by the Mounted Unit, Solo Motorcycles and Park and Beach Unit, shall continue to be issued by the Department. Uniform items purchased by employees shall meet all specifications as provided by the San Francisco Police Department. The specifications for uniform items to be purchased by employees follows as Appendix D.

    131. Also in exchange for the annual uniform allowance, employees shall assume all costs of maintenance, repair and damage to the standard uniform items, including damage or repair to normal business attire worn by inspectors and other non-uniformed sworn employees. Employees shall be prohibited from filing personal property claims under General Order 3.15 for these items of clothing. The annual uniform allowance is provided specifically for employees to purchase the above listed standard uniform items. Employees shall, at all times, maintain a sufficient quantity and quality of uniform items to meet uniform and grooming standards at all times.

    132. This provision will satisfy any and all obligations to provide employees with uniform clothing and maintenance.


Section 8.	Health and Dental Coverage.

    A. Employee Health Coverage.

    133. Except as provided below, the City shall contribute annually for employee health benefits, the contribution required under the Charter.

    134. Except as provided below, in addition the City shall contribute the full premium for the employee’s own health care benefit coverage for “medically single” employees (i.e., employees not receiving a City contribution for dependent health care benefits).

    B. Dependent Health Coverage.

    135. Except as provided below, the City shall contribute the greater amount of $225 per month or 75% of the dependent rate charged by the City to employees for Kaiser coverage at the dependent plus two or more level.

    C. Health Coverage Effective January 1, 2015

135.a. 1. If, by July 1, 2014, the Public Employee Committee of the San Francisco Labor Council (PEC) and the City agree to a contribution model for employee health insurance premiums based on the City’s contribution of a percentage of those premiums and the employee’s payment of the balance (Percentage-Based Contribution Model), to be effective January 1, 2015 (for calendar year 2015 and thereafter), then effective January 1, 2015 the City shall contribute toward the health premiums for enrolled POA members the same percentage described in the PEC Percentage-Based Contribution Model, for the applicable health insurance plan, unless the City and the POA mutually agree to a different Percentage-Based Contribution Model. If the PEC and the City do not agree by July 1, 2014 to a new Percentage-Based Contribution Model to be effective January 1, 2015, then the City and the POA will reopen the MOU on health insurance premium contributions only, with any resulting impasse being subject to interest arbitration under Charter section A8.590-5. Reopener negotiations and impasse procedures, including, but not limited to, the 10-day period under Charter section A8.590-5(e), will be completed by no later than August 15, 2014.

135.b.2. To ensure that all employees enrolled in health insurance through the City’s Health Service System (HSS) are making premium contributions under a Percentage-Based Contribution Model and therefore have a stake in controlling the long term growth in health insurance costs, it is agreed that, to the extent the City's health insurance premium contribution under a Percentage-Based Contribution Model is less than the “average contribution” for the City’s HSS members, as established under Charter section A8.428(b) (Average Contribution), then, in addition to the City’s contribution, the employee’s health insurance premium contribution shall be deemed to apply to the annual Average Contribution. The parties intend that the City’s contribution toward premiums for members’ health care should not exceed the amount established under Percentage-Based Contribution Model.

135.c.3. Upon implementation of new contribution rates effective on January 1, 2015, Article III., section 8.C shall supersede Article III., sections 8.A and 8.B, and those sections will no longer be effective.

    136. C. The aforesaid contributions shall be paid to the City Health Services System, not be considered as a part of an employee's salary for the purposes of computing straight time earnings, compensation for overtime worked, premium pay, retirement benefits, or retirement contributions; nor shall such contributions be taken into account in determining the level of any other benefit which is a function of or percentage of salary.

    D. Dental Coverage.

    137. The City shall continue to provide dental benefits at the existing level.
137a. Effective July 1, 2011, employees who enroll in the Delta Dental PPO Plan shall pay the following premiums for the respective coverage levels:    $5/month for employee-only,
$10/month for employee + 1 dependent, or $15/month for employee + 2 or more dependents.

    138. E. Employees shall be permitted to choose which available City plan they wish to participate in.

    139. F. Benefits that are made available by the City to the domestic partners of other City employees shall simultaneously be made available to the domestic partners of members of the Department.

    G. Hepatitis B Vaccine.

    140. The City shall provide, at its cost, Hepatitis B vaccine immunization for employees whose health plans do not provide the benefit.

    H. Annual Tuberculosis Screening.

    141. The City will provide, at its cost, annual tuberculosis screening for employees.

I.	Employee Assistance Program.

    142. The City shall continue to provide the existing or equivalent employee assistance benefits presently provided by United Behavioral Health.


Section 9.	Retirement.

A.	Mandatory Employee Retirement Contribution.

    143. For the duration of this Agreement, employees shall pay their own retirement contributions. Tier 1 employees will contribute an amount equal to 7% of covered gross salary; Tier 2 employees and Harbor Police Officers will contribute an amount equal to 7.5% of covered gross salary. The parties acknowledge that said contributions satisfy the requirements of Charter Sections A8.595-11(d) and A8.597-11(d) for the duration of this Agreement.

143a.   Notwithstanding paragraph 143. above, the parties agree to further extend employee cost sharing by increasing the retirement contribution for all employees by three percent (3%) for the two- year period beginning July 1, 2011 and ending June 30, 2013. As of July 1, 2013, the parties agree to effectuate any applicable cost sharing provisions of a Charter amendment initiated by the Mayor, approved by the Board of Supervisors, and approved by the voters in the November 2011 election.

    144. If the majority of City & County of San Francisco employees agree to an employee contribution to fund retiree health benefits, the parties agree to reopen the MOU on the subject of an
employee contribution to fund retiree health benefits. This reopener is subject to the impasse resolution procedures as set forth in Charter Section A8.590-1 et seq.

    145. B. Employees with twenty (20) years' service who leave the Department, but who retain their membership in the retirement system, shall be deemed to be retired for purposes of Penal Code Section 12027.

    146. C. Rule changes by the City’s Retirement Board regarding the crediting of accrued sick leave for retirement purposes shall be incorporated herein by reference. Any such rule changes, however, shall not be subject to the grievance and arbitration provisions of current Memorandum of Understanding or the impasse procedures of Charter Section A8.590-1, et. seq.

D. Pre-Retirement Planning Seminar and Retirement Ceremony.

    147. The City shall continue to offer pre-retirement seminars and retirement ceremonies for bargaining unit members. These functions shall be administered by the Police Academy in consultation with the Police Officers Association. Bargaining unit members shall be offered the opportunity to attend the seminar in order of the number of years of service credit they have earned towards retirement. A preference shall be given to those members who have filed for retirement with the Retirement System. The City's cost for such services shall not exceed
$15,000 per fiscal year.

147a. Effective July 1, 2010, for Tier I employees who retire prior to July 1, 2013 and whose final compensation for retirement purposes is impacted by the economic concessions described in paragraphs 104, 104a, 104aa and 115a, said employees’ final compensation for retirement purposes shall be calculated at the rate of remuneration that would have been attached to the rank or position held by the employee, at the time of retirement, had there been no economic concessions for Fiscal Years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012.

147b. Effective July 1, 2010, for Tier II employees who retire prior to July 1, 2013, and whose final compensation for retirement purposes is impacted by the pensionable economic concessions described in paragraphs 104, 104a, 104aa and 115a for the period from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2012, the City will make available restoration pay in a lump sum equivalent to the pensionable economic concessions for the period used by the San Francisco Employees Retirement System to determine the employee’s final compensation for retirement purposes (Final Compensation Period). Only pensionable economic concessions deferred from July 1, 2010 through June 30, 2012 are eligible for restoration.

147c.    For Tier I and Tier II employees who retire prior to July 1, 2013, payouts of vacation, vested sick leave, compensatory time and wellness pay shall be at the employee’s normal (non- deferred) hourly wage rate, although nothing herein requires the San Francisco Employees Retirement System to include payouts of vacation, vested sick leave, compensatory time or wellness pay in retirement calculations.

Section 10.	Wellness Programs.

    A. Wellness Program.

    148. The City shall continue to provide a wellness program as follows:

    149. 1.	Employees must establish and maintain a core bank of sick leave hours in order to qualify for the wellness program. That core bank shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) hours.

    150. 2.	Once an employee has established their core bank of sick leave hours (as provided in
(a) above) they shall be entitled to an annual conversion of sick leave hours for cash out payment under the above conditions. If an employee utilizes thirty (30) hours or less of sick leave in a fiscal year, they shall be entitled to cash out up to fifty (50) hours accrued during that fiscal year. If an employee utilized more than thirty (30) hours of sick leave in a fiscal year, they are not eligible for any sick leave cash out. Sick leave hours donated to catastrophic sick leave bank(s) or used for authorized bereavement leave according to the Civil Service Rules shall not be considered sick leave utilization for purposes of this paragraph.

    151. 3.	Payment of the cash out shall take place on annual basis on the pay period closest to June 1 for each remaining fiscal year of this Agreement.

    152. 4.	The aforesaid payments shall not be considered as part of an employee’s salary for the purpose of computing retirement benefits or retirement contributions.

152a.	5.	This program shall be suspended for Fiscal Years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011.

    B. Pilot "wellness incentive program" to promote workforce attendance:

    153. A full-time employee leaving the employment of the City upon service or disability retirement may receive payment of a portion of accrued sick leave credits at the time of separation. To be eligible, an employee must have utilized one hundred and sixty (160) hours or less of sick leave during the final two-year period prior to retirement. Sick leave hours donated to catastrophic sick leave bank(s) or used for authorized bereavement leave according to the Civil Service Rules shall not be considered sick leave utilization for purposes of this paragraph.

    154. The amount of this payment shall be equal to two-and-one-half percent (2.5%) of accrued sick leave credits at the time of separation times the number of whole years of continuous employment times an employee's salary rate, exclusive of premiums or supplements, at the time of separation. Vested sick leave credits, as set forth under Civil Service Commission Rules, shall not be included in this computation and shall be compensated pursuant to those Rules.
    155. Example of Calculation

Employee A retires with 20 years of service. Employee A has a sick leave balance of 500 hours.
Employee A has a base salary rate of $25.00 per hour at the time of separation.

Wellness Incentive = 2.5% for each year of service x 20 years of service = 50% 50% x 500 hours = 250 hours.
250 hours x $25.00 (base salary at time of separation) = $6,250.00

    156. The number of hours for which an employee may receive cash payments shall not exceed one thousand forty (1040) hours, including any vested sick leave.

    157. A wellness incentive bonus payment shall not be considered as part of an employee's compensation for the purpose of computing retirement benefits or retirement contributions.

    158. The beneficiaries of employees who are killed in the line of duty, whose names are engraved on the Memorial Wall of the SFPD Hall of Justice, shall receive payments provided by the wellness incentive program.

    159. The Pilot “wellness incentive program” to promote workforce attendance sunset on June 30, 2018.


Section 11. Paid Sick Leave Ordinance.

    160. San Francisco Administrative Code, Chapter 12W Paid Sick Leave Ordinance is expressly waived in its entirety with respect to employees covered by this Agreement.
ARTICLE IV. SCOPE

Section 1.	Severability.

    161. Should any provision of this Memorandum or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances, be held invalid, the remainder of this Agreement or the application of such provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby.

Section 2.	Duration.

    162. This Agreement shall be effective upon ratification and shall be effective from July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2018.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Memorandum of Understanding this

 	 day of	, 2013.



FOR THE CITY

FOR THE ASSOCIATION
Micki Callahan	Date
Director, Human Resources Department

Martin Halloran	Date
President, Police Officers’ Association
Martin R. Gran	Date
Employee Relations Director






APPROVED AS TO FORM:
Dennis Herrera, City Attorney


Elizabeth Salveson	Date
Chief Labor Attorney


APPENDIX A

FOR INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY


Civil Service Rule 220

Sec. 220.1 Leaves of Absence - General Requirements
            220.1.1 Leaves of absence, hereinafter referred to in this Rule as "leave," shall be governed by the provisions of this Rule. For the purpose of this Rule, "appointing officer" shall mean all elected officials; all department heads designated by the Charter as appointing officers; and all Boards and Commissions when officiating as appointing officers.
            220.1.2 Requests for leave shall be subject to the approval of the appointing officer or designee. The decision of the appointing officer or designee is final unless provision for appeal is specifically granted in this Rule. Such requests for appeal shall be processed in accordance with the appeal procedure provided in this Rule. Requests for military, maternity, or witness or jury duty leave shall be granted as provided herein.
            220.1.3 Except for vacation leave, witness or jury duty leave, compulsory sick leave, disability leave or unpaid administrative leave, an employee requesting a leave for more than five (5) working days shall submit such request to the appointing officer or designee on the form prescribed by the Human Resources Director. Requests for sick leave in excess of five (5) continuous working days shall be certified by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of dental surgery, doctor of podiatric medicine, licensed clinical psychologist, Christian Science Practitioner or licensed doctor of chiropractic. Verification of sick leave with pay for less than five (5) working days (seven (7) calendar days in the case of part-time employees) as provided elsewhere in this Rule shall be required on an individual basis only and shall be based upon an evaluation of the individual attendance record of an employee.
            220.1.4 The Human Resources Director may direct that leave requests be retained in the department and maintained in a manner so as to be readily available for audit, review, or analysis by Department of Human Resources staff.
            220.1.5 Except as otherwise provided in these Rules, leave granted for the period stated on the prescribed form may be extended or abridged only with the approval of the appointing officer or designee. An employee who does not return to work on the approved date shall be deemed as away without official leave and shall be subject to automatic resignation as provided elsewhere in these Rules.
            220.1.6 Except when an employee requesting sick leave has accumulated unused sick leave with pay credits and except for employees eligible for military leave with pay, witness or jury duty leave, disability leave or leave due to battery as provided elsewhere in this Rule, or for authorized holiday or vacation, leaves shall be without pay.

I	220.1.7 Refer to the Probationary Period Rule on leave during the probationary period.
APPENDIX A
            220.1.8 Exempt employees may be granted leaves in accordance with the provisions of this Rule. The decision of the appointing officer shall be final and not subject to appeal.
            220.1.9 An appointee shall not be required to sign a resignation form as a condition of approval of a leave.
            220.1.10 Leaves granted under this Rule shall be indicated on time rolls as designated by the Controller.
            220.1.11 An authorized leave granted under this Rule shall not be considered as a break in the continuous service of an employee.


Sec. 220.7 Definition of Sick Leave
A leave granted under this Rule for One of the following reasons shall be known as "sick leave":

220.7.4 Sick Leave - Maternity
Absence due to the employee's pregnancy or convalescent period following childbirth. Such leave shall not exceed six (6) months provided that such leave may be extended for permanent employees if a physician certifies that a longer convalescence period is required. Such extensions shall be subject to the provisions of this Rule governing sick leave without pay.


APPENDIXB

San Francisco Police Department
GENERAL ORDER


11.12
Rev. 01/07/04



TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY/REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

This order describes the Department's policies and procedures for temporary modified duty and reasonable accommodation for sworn members of the Department. This order supersedes Information Bulletin #86-133, and all other Bulletins, Orders, Policies or Procedures regarding modified duty and reasonable accommodation. This order contains the Department's entire modified duty and reasonable accommodation policy. This order is intended to be consistent with any rights members may have under law, including without limitation, workers compensation, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Fair Employment and Housing Act.

Except for matters related to compensation while engaged in temporary modified duty assignments, nothing in this general order, and no decisions made pursuant to this general order, shall be grievable under the Memorandum of Understanding between the Police Officers' Association and the City.
    I. INTRODUCTION
        A. This Department is charged with the duty to protect life and property, to maintain the peace, to prevent crime, to enforce criminal laws and ordinances. These duties are best accomplished when all members are capable of performing the essential functions of their positions. Additionally, the Department's staffing has been impacted by the amendment to the Charter regarding minimum staffing of the Department.

        B. This policy has two parts. First, it outlines the temporary modified duty assignments for members who are temporarily injured or ill. Second, it describes the procedure for members to seek accommodation under State and Federal disabilities laws including the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Fair Employment and Housing Act.
    II. TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY POLICY

The temporary modified duty policy allows·sworn members who have a temporary illness or injury to continue to serve in the Department when they are unable to perform the essential functions of their position.
        A. ELIGIBILITY FOR TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENTS
            1. With the approval of the Chief of Police or his or her designee, a member who sustains a temporary injury or illness and who is thereby limited from performing the essential functions of his or her position may be provided a temporary modified duty assignment.

            2. This temporary modified duty policy applies only to sworn members of the Department (hereinafter referred to as "members"). It does not apply to civilian employees or employees in the academy. Probationary employees are eligible to the extent that they can complete all probation requirements within the time
period set forth in the current Memorandum of Understanding between the City and the Police Officers' Association.
DGO 11.12
Rev. 01/07/04

        B. DURATION OF TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENTS
            1. Limited To 365 Days. Temporary modified duty assignments shall be limited in dmation to a maximum of 365 days. At the end of 30 days of a temporary modified duty assignment, or earlier if warranted, a member shall be reviewed by the Staff Services Division to determine whether the member will be able to retmn to his or her regular assignment. If the modified assignment extends beyond 30 days, the member's status will be reviewed every 30 days up to the maximum 365-day dmation.   Approximately 90 days prior to the expiration of the 365 day temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will notify members of the options set forth in subsection 3. below. Prior to the expiration of the 365 day temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will consider and discuss with those members the options set forth in subsection 3. below.

            2. Available Only If Members May Return To Regular Position. If before or dming the temporary modified duty assignment the Department's Physician determines that the member will not be able to retmn to his or her regular position prior to the expiration of the temporary modified duty assignment, then the Department will consider and discuss with the member the options set forth in subsection 3. below. At this point, the member will no longer be eligible for temporary modified duty. In making this determination, the Department's
Physician may consult with the City's independent medical expert, medically examine the member, review medical records, and/or consult with the member's treating physician.

            3. End Of Temporary Modified Duty Assignment. Once a member is permanent and stationary and/or has served in a temporary modified duty position for 365 days, or earlier if warranted, the Department will consider and discuss with the member the following options: (I) returning the member to full duty; (2) granting a request for a disability accommodation under the ADA and/or state law (which may include a disability transfer under the City's disability transfer policy); (3) recommending disability retirement; (4) providing an unpaid leave of absence pmsuant to the Civil Service Rules; (5) allowing sick leave or FMLA leave; or (6) initiating non-punitive medical separation if none of the above are appropriate.

            4. Members Currently On Modified Duty. Members who are on modified duty as of the effective date of this General Order shall be entitled to a temporary modified duty assignment for a period of 365 days starting the effective date of this General Order. Approximately 90 days prior to the expiration of the 365 day temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will notify members of the options set forth in subsection 3. above. Prior to the expiration of the 365 day temporary modified duty assignment, the Department will consider and discuss with those members the options set forth in subsection 3. above.
DGO 11.12
Rev. 01/07/04

    c. RULES GOVERNING TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENTS
        1. Temporary modified duty assignments are those assignments within the Department that can be performed by members who temporarily cannot perform the essential functions of their position.

        2. Temporary modified duty assignments available to members will be subject to the following limitations:

            a. Members will not be placed at district stations unless otherwise authorized by the Deputy Chief of Administration, and approved by the Chief of Police. These assignments shall be reviewed every 30 days.

            b. Members in temporary modified duty assignments shall be eligible for premium pay such as like work-like pay and overtime assignments, including but not limited to PLES overtime, as long as such assignments are consistent with the member's medical restrictions and the needs of the Department. Disputes about this issue will be submitted to the Deputy Chief of Administration for determination.

            c. Any involuntary transfer or reassignment shall require 48 hours notice, absent an emergency.

-----	3.		No sworn member shall be given a temporary modified duty assignment in a budgeted non-sworn position.

    D. PROCESS FOR RECEIVING A TEMPORARY MODIFIED DUTY ASSIGNMENT

        1. The process for receiving a temporary modified duty assignment begins either when the Department receives: (1) notification from Workers' Compensation Division that a member with an industrial injury may return to work in a modified duty capacity; or (2) a memorandum from a member with a non­ industrial injury requesting to return to work in a temporary modified duty capacity.
        2. The member's medical work restrictions are reviewed at the Staff Services Division, which shall compare the limitation(s) placed on the member by his or her treating physician with available temporary modified duty assignments. The Department may review the limitation(s) placed on the member by his or her treating physician with the City's independent medical expert and/or the Department Physician.
DGO 11.12
Rev. 01/07/04

        3. In the event of questions regarding a member's ability to perform (1) the essential functions of a member's position, or (2) modified duties, the Department shall contact the member's treating physician and/or the City's medical expert for clarification. For industrial injuries, if there is a dispute over this issue, a final determination will be made in accordance with Workers' Compensation Rules.
        4. The Deputy Chief of Administration may make a recommendation for a temporary modified duty assignment to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall make the final decision regarding the availability of a temporary modified duty assignment based on the member's medical restrictions and the personnel needs of the Department. His or her decision shall also take into consideration the member's job skills, job qualifications, training, experience, and any other relevant factors.
        5. If a member is placed in a temporary modified duty assignment, he or she will be required to sign an acknowledgment confirming that he or she understands this policy, including its time limits, and agrees to abide by it.
    III. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
        A. POLICY. Members may request a reasonable accommodation when they have a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities. This impairment may or may not be as a result of a work-related incident. A copy of the City's "Employee Information Sheet Regarding CCSF Reasonable Accommodation
Process" is available through the Department's ADA coordinator.

        B. REQUESTING A REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. To request a reasonable accommodation, a member shall contact the Department's ADA coordinator and complete a request for accommodation form and a medical release. The ADA coordinator will engage in the interactive process with the member, and will review whether any reasonable accommodation is possible in the member's position.
        C. ADA COORDINATOR RECOMMENDATION. Without disclosing confidential medical information, the ADA coordinator shall present the member's restrictions and a recommendation regarding reasonable accommodation to the Duty Evaluation Committee.
    IV. DUTY EVALUATION COMMITTEE.
        A. The Duty Evaluation Committee shall be composed of the following members: the Deputy Chief of Administration Bureau (Chair), the Commanding Officer of the Staff Services Division, the Personnel Sergeant, the Police Physician, and the Department's ADA Coordinator.



l	--
DGO 11.12
Rev. 01/07/04

        B. Toe Committee shall convene within 30 days of the receipt of the ADA coordinator's recommendation or sooner at the request of the member. At the meeting, the member requesting accommodation is entitled to be present and be represented by the Police Officers' Association or any other representative chosen by the member. The Committee shall consider the following:

            1. The nature, extent and seriousness of the member's restrictions, i.e., whether the member has restrictions that limit one or more major life activities.

            2. Whether the member, with reasonable accommodation, could perform the essential functions of his or her full-duty position, including through such methods as restructuring nonessential functions, or other means which do not pose an undue hardship to the Department or pose a direct threat to the health or safety of the members and others.

            3. When the Committee determines that a member cannot be reasonably accommodated to perform the essential job functions of his or her sworn position, the ADA coordinator shall refer the member to the Department of Human Resources for a 60 day concurrent Department and City-wide search for job vacancies which meet the member's medical restrictions and for which the member meets the minimum qualifications. The member may elect not to participate in the Citywide search by notifying the Department of this election in writing.

            4. In addition, when the Committee determines that a member cannot be reasonably accommodated to perform the essential job functions of his or her sworn position, the Committee will consider and discuss with the member of the following options: (1) recommending disability retirement; (2) providing an unpaid leave of absence pursuant to the Civil Service Rules; (3) allowing sick leave or FMLA leave; or (4) initiating non-punitive medical separation if none of the above are appropriate, and the member has not been placed in another position pursuant to the 60 day concurrent Department and City-wide search for job vacancies.

            5. In determining whether to recommend a member for ordinary or industrial disability retirement, the Committee shall consider, any or all of the following: Workers' Compensation Appeals Board determinations(s), Disability Evaluation Unit rating(s), nature and extent of medical restrictions or limitations, body part(s) affected, length of service, and relevant medical reports.

            6. The Duty Evaluation Committee will consider the factors above, and will not consider a member's refusal to participate in the Citywide search or to accept an offered non-sworn position.

            7. Based on all of the above, the Duty Evaluation Committee shall make a determination and shall communicate that to the member in a timely fashion.
DGO 11.12
Rev. 01/07/04

        C. REVIEW TO CHIEF OF POLICE. If the member disagrees with the determination of the Duty Evaluation Committee, the member may request a review of the Committee's determination by the Chief of Police.

        D. ACCOMMODATION IN NON-SWORN POSITION. No member shall be granted an accommodation in a budgeted non-sworn position, unless the position is vacant and the member received a disability transfer to that position pursuant to City policy.






APPENDIX C
Mandatory Rotation Policy in the
San Francisco Police Department’s Field Operations Bureau


The primary goal of the Mandatory Rotation Policy (MRP) is to expose both newly hired officers, along with future hires, to the various diverse communities in our City. As a result of the wide-array of experiences, it is believed that officers will increase their overall knowledge of the communities they serve. This policy will effect a change to Department General Order 11.06, Personnel Transfers.


    5- Year rotation for recently hired officers.

Under the MRP, officers hired on or after January 1, 2007 will be subject to a mandatory 5-year rotation.

Officers affected by the MRP will not be precluded from transferring to another station prior to the five-year period expiring. All permanent transfer rights (DGO 11.06) will still be protected under this plan. For example, an officer who was given an opportunity to transfer to another station assignment during his/her third year at a particular station will be allowed to transfer, but he/she will have five years at the new assignment. Under no circumstances will any officer affected under this plan be allowed to remain at an assignment for more than five years.

During the months of November and May of each year, officers shall submit a “Mandatory Transfer Request Form” for whatever station they would like to be transferred. After the first 20 positions (2 slots at each station) are filled at the district stations, the Deputy Chief of FOB, or his/her designee, will personally contact the remaining officers affected by this plan and inform them of what stations will have positions available. The implementation of the MRP will go into effect during the month of February and July each year, prior to the mandated station sign up.

In the second year of the program, the number of available slots per station will go from 2 per station to 3 per station. The Administration and the Police Officer’s Association will meet and confer regarding additional slots per station after the second year of the rotational (“P2”) plan.

The Staff Services Division will be responsible for keeping accurate records of those officers involved in the rotational (“P2”) program. During the first week of November and May of every year, the Staff Services Division will consult the Commander and Deputy Chief of Patrol as to which officers must rotation in February and July. A designee from the Staff Services Division will send notices out to those officers transferring in February and July indicating that they will be contacted during the last two weeks in January and June for stations requests. The Staff Services Division or a designee from the Field Operations Bureau Headquarters will contact those officers due
for rotation, by seniority, and will provide them with the opportunity to choose their assignment, based on availability and their seniority. After the mandatory slots are filled, the Field Operations Bureau will designate assignments based on the needs for staffing at the district stations.


TACTICAL COMPANY

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Tactical Company will not be affected by the 5-year mandatory rotation. All new transfers into the Tactical Company (S.W.A.T.) will be subject to a seven (7) year rotation. At the conclusion of the seven- year period, the Tactical officer will be given an opportunity to complete a “Mandatory Transfer Request Form” to request a station assignment, consistent with the above listed policy. The existing Department policy of requiring officers to pass a battery of tests before becoming a member of Tactical Company will remain in effect.


CANINE UNIT/TACTICAL COMPANY

Effective with the next transfer into the Canine Unit, all new Q-2 officers will be subject to a seven (7) year rotation in the unit. All officers who are presently assigned to the Canine Unit will not be affected by this plan. At the conclusion of the seven-year assignment, all new officers will be required to leave the unit. At the conclusion of the seven-year period, the Canine officer will be given an opportunity to complete a “Mandatory Transfer Request Form” to request a station assignment, consistent with the MRP. Any present or future requirements that need to be met prior to becoming a member of the Canine Unit are not effected by this agreement.


YOUTH SERVICES UNIT/SRO

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Youth Services Unit will not be affected by the 5-year mandatory rotation. The School Resource Officer Unit is an exempt position in the Field Operations Bureau. Upon implementation of the MRP, all officers must have at least 3 years seniority in the Department before being assigned to the Youth Services Unit and will remain in the unit for no longer than 5 years. At the conclusion of the 5 years, officers will return to their original assignments or they may choose to participate in the mandatory rotation program. (See above for veteran officer participation)


TACTICAL COMPANY/MARINE UNIT

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Marine Unit will not be affected by the 5-year mandatory rotation. All new transfers into the Tactical Company/Marine Unit will be subject to a seven (7) year rotation. At the conclusion of the seven-year period, the
Marine Unit officer will be given an opportunity to complete a “Mandatory Transfer Request Form” to request a station assignment, consistent with the MRP. The existing Department policy of requiring officers to pass a battery of tests before becoming a member of Marine Unit officer will remain in effect.


HOMELAND SECURITY UNIT

All Q-2 officers who are currently assigned to the Homeland Security Unit will not be affected by the 5-year mandatory rotation. The Homeland Security Unit is an exempt position in the Field Operations Bureau. Upon implementation of the MRP, all officers who are assigned to the Homeland Security Unit thereafter will remain in the unit for no longer than 5 years. At the conclusion of the 5 years, the officer will return to their original assignment or they may choose to participate in the mandatory rotation program. (See above for veteran officer participation)


SERGEANTS IN FIELD OPERATIONS BUREAU

Beginning with new appointments after June 1, 2007, all new Sergeants will be subject to a five (5) year rotation. After receiving their permanent assignment as a Sergeant, they will be allowed to remain in that assignment for a period not to exceed five years. During this five-year time period, nothing precludes a Sergeant from accepting a transfer to another assignment in accordance with D.G.O. 11.06 to another station/assignment. At the start of this program, there should be 1 slot available at every station for veteran Sergeants who wish to participate in the MRP.
06/i	rELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058	Gl002

APPENDIXD

San Fnncisco Pofu:e·Department
U-	GENERAL	ORDER

10.01·
08/10/94

UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT CLASSES

This order identifies the Department's uniform classes and·specifies the  uniform and equipment items within each class.

        I. POLICY
            A. UNIFORM CLASSES. The following constitute the various classes of
uniform used by the San Francisco Police Department:

                1. FORMAL, CLASS AA, COMMISSIONED OFFICERS
'	'

                    a. Service hat.
                    b. White shirt (long sleeve).
C.    Black necktie.
d	Dress coat.
    e. Trousers with black belt.
    f. Black socks.
    g. Black shoes (shined).

    h. Department-authorized handgun and holster
(not exposed below the coat}.

    i. Gloves (as specified).

    j. Medal(s) of Valor or rlbbon(s).
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058 [;1003




DGO 10.01 08/10/94

                2. FORMAL, CLASS AA, MOUNTED OFFICERS (all ranks}
                    a. Campaign hat.


!ZJ6/0v2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058 [;1004



DGO 10.01,
08/i0/94

                3. FORMAL, CLASS AA, MOTORCYCLE OFFICERS (all ranks)

                    a. White helmet.

h  Dark blue shirt (long sleeve).

    c. Black necktie.

    d. Dress coat

    e. Riding breeches with trouser
belt
£	Black boots (shined).
    g. Equipment belt with shoulder strap (holster and Department.. authorized handgun, speed· loaders, handcuffs and case) worn on the outside of the dress coat

    h. Gloves (as specified).

    i. All other required equipment.

    j. Medal(s) of Valor or ribbon(s).


The Fonnal Uniform shall be worn at ceremt>nies, funerals, state functions and other formal events as directed by the Chief of Police.
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058	Gl005



DGO 10.01
08/10/94

                4. DRESS, CLASS A, ALL BUREAUS AND DIVISIONS (all ranks)

                    a. Service hat (motorcycle officers:
white helmet).

h	Dark blue shirt (long sleeve).
C.	Black necktie.

    d. Dark blue dress .1"Ike" jacket.

    e. . Trouser. (motorcycle and mounted officers, breeches) with trouser belt
    f. Black socks for shoes.
    g. Black shoes (shined) (motoicy e and mounted officers: black boots).
. :.t	,
·. '.       ,,':•'.·······
·..	.,, ,":, ·:,
    h. Eq p	t belt wi	holster,
Department authonzed handgun,. handcuffs with case and  all required equipment.•  .•

i	Gloves (as specified).
    j. Medal(s} of Valor orrlbbon(s).
· .. ;,•
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058 [;1006



DGO 10.01' 08/10/94

                5. DUTY, CLASS B1  PATROL DIVISION (all ranks)

a.. Service hat.

h Dark blue shirt
(long or short sleeve).

        c. Foul weather jacket (optional).

        d. Field sweater foptionaD.
        e. Trousers with belt.
        f. Black shoes (shined).

        g. Black socks for shoes.

        h. Equipment belt, holster with Department-authorized handgun and all required equipment
        i. Ribbons (optional).
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058 [;1007




DGO 10.01
08/10/94

                6. DUTY, CLASS B, TRAFFIC DIVISION (Motorcycle -Officers)
                    a. White helmet h -Dark.blue shirt
(long or short sleeve).
c.   Black leather jacket (optio .al).';•·• cl. Foul Jather jacket (optional).
S,         I	'     \, •



    e. Field weater (optional).
,· ·.. ·:...',· •••. ::: ;-i' ·:··._·,.,;

    f. •• ·· Bre:ches with trouser belt.
;
    g. Black boots (shined).
:   ,,•• •	·,'.I'.'


    h. Equipm'ent belt, holster_ with Department-authorized ••• •:. • handgun and all :required
-equipment.
,;J,;:f
/ \t\( ;l
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058 [;1008



DGO 10.01
08/10/94

                7. DUTY, CLASS B" SPECIAL OPERATIONS DIVISION (Mounted Officers)

                    a. Service hat.

h Dark blue shirt
Oong or short sleeve).
c.   Black leather jacket (optional).
d Field sweater (optional).
    e. Breeches with trouser belt.
    f. Black boots (shined).

    g. Equipment belt, holster with Department-authorized handgun •. and all required equipment.
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERRTIDNS	95574919	NO.058 [;1009





DGO 10.01
08/10/94

                8. DUTY, CLASS B, SPECIAL OPERATIONS DMSION (Motorbike Unit)
                    a. White helmet.

\f,.
                    b. Jumpsuit.	!•	• -
                    c. Motocross boots.
                    d. Equipment belt, Department
authorized handgun and all
                        ▪ requtred equipment.

                    e. 36" baton
f..•	Gloves as required.

g.  All other required equipment.
h.   Black leather jacket (optional).






















t···
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058	Q010



DGO 10.01'
08/10/94

                9. DUTY, CLASS B, PATROL DIVISION (Bicycle Officer)

                    a. Bicycle helmet.

                    b. Dark blue shirt
(long or short sleeve).

                    c. Foul weather jacket or windbreaker (optional).

                    d. Field sweater (optional).
                    e. Bicycle pants..
                    f. Bicycle shoes (shined).

                    g. Bicycle gloves.

                    h. Sunglasses.

i		Equipment belt, holster with Department-authorized handgun and all required equipment
j. Ribbons (optional).
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	N0.058 [;1011



DGO 10.01
08/1 0/94

                10. SPECIAL, CLASS C, ALL BUREAUS AND DIVISIONS (all ranks)
                    a. Service cap (baseball cap).
h	Jumpsuit.
    c. Black shoes or boots (shined).
    d. .Bl cksocks for shoes.
    e. Equipment belt; Department­
. authorized  handgun  and all
·required equipment.
£	261" baton.
g. • Gloves as required.
h. All other required equipment.














10





























·'.'·
'  '·
,.1















































































[·'.:,




li
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058 [;)012





l)
                11. TACTICAL, CLASS D (all officers)

                    a. Riot helmet.

                    b. Service cap (baseball cap)
carried in jumpsuit pocket.
C. Jumpsuit.
d. Black socks for shoes.
e. Black shoes or black boots
(shined).

£.	Black leather equipment belt
with all required equipment.
g.  Department-authorized
handgun.













, ·•,,,
DGO i0.01 08/10/94
u	h. 3611baton.
    i. Black leather gloves.
. All other required equipment



















11
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERRTIONS	95574919	NO.058 [;1013



DGO 10.01
08/1 0/94

                12. TACTICAL, a.ASS D (SPECIAL OPERATIONS GROUP)

                    a. Service cap (baseball cap). h	Camouflage jumpsuit.
C.   Black boots.

d. Blackleather equipment belt with all required equipment.

e. Department-authorized handgun.
f.. Black leather gloves.

g. All other required equipment




















12	(_
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	N0.058 [;1014




C
                13. RECRUIT, CLASS E (all recruit officers)

                    a. Service cap (baseball cap).
                    b. Light blue shirt.

                    c. Dark blue undershirt.

                    d. Dark blue pants.

                    e. Black leather belt.

                    f. Black shoes (shined).

                    g. Black socks.

h.. All other required equipment.





















13
DGO 10.01'
08/1 0/94





06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058	Gl015
i
I


DGO 10.01 08/10/94

ff[.
\'._,.- .

            B. UNIFORM OF THE DAY

                1. PATROL DIVISION. Unless otherwise specified, the uniform of the day for
the Patrol Division is DUTY1   Gass B.

                2. PROPERTY CONTROL SECUON. Unless otherwise specified, the uniform of the day for Property Control Section personnel is Special., Class C (jumpsuit).

C RAIN GEAR. Rain gear may be wom as required.
.	.
    D. FIELD SWEJ\.TERS. Field sweaters may be wom only with the Dutyr Oass B unifomi, over a long or short-sleeved shirt·	• ••	•

    E. UNDERSHIRTS, DICKIES. Officers sh.all not wear anything under the uniform shirt or jumpsuit, visible at the neckline., that is not solid black -or navy blue. ·No undergarment shall show below the hem or•cuff of the sleeve.
    F. SERVICE HAT.· Officers shall ensure that their service hats a:re serviceable
and immediately accessible within the passenger compartment of their		f"' assigned yehicles. The service hat shall be wom in any the following	\; · circumstances:	•

        1. wrirldng a footbeat.
it\};,}· '.i:.:.    ,·': !
        2. When working an assignment in which the primary function is crowd
control.,·e.g., parades, sporting events, efc.
        3. When conducting traffic stops.

4.. When directing traffic.
    5. When conducting an investigation at the scene of a traffic accident.
    6. At inspections, ceremonies, funerals and other appropriate formal eveit.ts.·
' J
    7. In.situations requiring immediate recognition for officer safety, e.g.., building searches., in-progress burglarles1in..progress robbei:ies, in progress aggravated assaults, hostage situations, critical incidents, etc.



        ◦ 14
1::'·
'-
06/01/2004	10:47	FIELD OPERATIONS 95574919	NO.058	GJ016



DGO 10.01
08/10/94

    8. When ch'cumstances are such that the wearing of the service hat is appropriate, e.g., non•violent protests and demonstrations, dignitaxy protection, fixed post assignments, etc.

    G. SENIORITY STRIPES. Seniority stripes may be worn only by non• commissioned officers, ie., patrol officers and sergeants, and shall be placed only on the ulke"' jacket and/or the long-sleeved u¢.form shirt, centered on the left forearm.- Each stripe represents five years of service to the Departm.ent.

    H. MEDALS OF VALOR/RIBBONS. Medals of Valor may be worn only on the fonnal coat or on the dress 11Ike11jacket centered below the star. Medals of
Valor and ribbons shall not be wom simultaneously.

L SHOULDER PATCHES AND CHEVRONS. Shoulder patches and chevrons (sergeants stripes) shall not be placed on the leather jacket or on the rain jacket.




























,'	.
i	15
.._,.,/
INDEMNITY AGREEMENT


This Indemnity Agreement ("Agreement") is made between the San Francisco Police Officers Association ("POA") and the City and County of San Francisco ("City").

WHEREAS the City and the POA entered into a Memorandum of Understanding, effective July 1, 2007;

WHEREAS section 6 of the MOU contains an agreement for release time of the POA President ("President's Release Time");

WHEREAS the POA has agreed to "execute an agreement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, that indemnifies and holds the City harmless from any legal claims by any party as to the conduct of the President during any period of release time"; and

WHEREAS the parties wish to hereby make said agreement;

NOW, THEREFORE, the City and the POA hereby agree as follows:

    1. The POA shall indemnify and save harmless the City and its officers, agents and employees (collectively, "Indemnitees") and, if requested by the City, shall defend Indemnitees against any and all loss, cost, damage, injury, liability and claims thereof, arising directly or indirectly out of or relating to the conduct of the POA President while on release time, including but not limited to the President's use of facilities or equipment provided by the City or others. The foregoing indemnity shall include reasonable fees of attorneys, consultants and experts, and costs, including such fees and costs incurred by the City in investigating and defending any claims against Indemnitees. This Agreement does not extend to the good faith exercise of peace officer powers under section 830.1 of the California Penal Code should the President be required to take such action pursuant to G.O. 2.01 Rule 2 or as directed by the Department.

    2. The indemnity provided by this Agreement applies regardless of the negligence of, and regardless of whether liability without fault is imposed or sought to be imposed on any Indemnitee, except to the extent that such indemnity is void or otherwise unenforceable under applicable law in effect on or validly retroactive to the date of this Agreement.

    3. If tender of defense is made to the POA, the POA has an immediate and independent obligation to defend Indemnitees from any claim which actually or potentially falls within this indemnification provision, even if the allegations are or may be groundless, false or fraudulent, which obligation arises at the time such claim is tendered to POA by City and continues at all times thereafter.

    4. This Agreement shall be effective for all periods from July 1, 2007 to and including June 30, 2011, with respect to any POA president during that period of time.
    5. The parties acknowledge that this Agreement constitutes the sole agreement between them relating to indemnity, that it supercedes any prior oral or written agreements on the topic, and that it may be modified only by a writing signed by all parties to this Agreement.

    6. The parties agree that the San Francisco Superior Court will have jurisdiction to enforce this Agreement. All disputes arising out of this Agreement shall be resolved by the San Francisco Superior Court.

SAN FRANCISCO POLICE OFFICER'S ASSOCIATION






Dated:  	

&_f_/4- -J--

CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO


By: --JLJ[.p!t. :ti-     L_:_    ­ S HORAN, Acting Director ment of Human Resourcest


APPROVED AS TO FORM:
DENNIS J. HERRERA, CITY ATTORNEY
City and County of San Francisco



ELI	BETH SALVESON
Chi	Labor Attorney
