
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING


This MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING made and entered into this 1st day of July, 2015.


BY AND BETWEEN	CITY OF SAN DIEGO


AND	SAN DIEGO POLICE OFFICERS
ASSOCIATION

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article  1 - Parties to Agreement	1
Article  2 - Recognition	1
Article   3 - Implementation	1
Article   4 - Term of Agreement	1
Article  5 - Renegotiation	2
Article  6 - Scope of Representation	3
Article 7 - Provisions of Law	3
Article  8 - Holidays	4
Article 9 - Management's Rights	6
Article 10 - No Discrimination Policy	7
Article 11 - Exchange of Days Off Between Employees	7
Article 12 - Information on New Employees	8
Article 13 - Flexible Benefits Plan	8
Article 14 - Industrial Leave	11
Article 15 - Educational Incentive	11
Article 16 - Bilingual Pay	12
Article 17 - Badges	13
Article 18 - Annual Leave	14
Article 19 - Sick Leave and Annual Leave Reimbursement	16
Article 20 - Board of Directors...................................;	16
Article 21 - Formal Representation	17
Article 22 - POA Access	19
Article 23 - Out-of-Class Assignments	20
Article 24 - Grievance Procedure	22
Article 25 - Salaries	27
Article 26 - Uniforms and Safety Equipment	28
Article 27 - Personnel Rules and Regulations	33
Article 28 - Field Training Officer Pay	36
Article 29 - Call-Back Pay	37
Article 30 - Court Pay	37
Article 31 - Stand-By Compensation	38
Article 32 - Overtime	39
Article 33 - Work Schedules	41
Article 34 - Starting Salary	42
Article 35 - POA Representation	42
Article 36 - Payroll Electronic Deposit	43
Article 37 - Employee Representation	43
Article 38 - Departmental Procedures - Advance Notice	44
Article 39 - Tuition Refund Plan	44
Article 40 - Flight Pay	47
Article 41 - Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights (POBOR) Procedures 48 Article 42 - Copies of the MOU	54
Article 43 - Seniority	54
Article 44 - Retirement	55
Article 45 - Long Term Disability Plan	62
Article 46 - Reopeners	62
Article 47 - Probation Period	65
Article 48 - Wellness	66
Article 49 - Transportation Incentives	66
Article 50 - Preferred Shift Selection	67
Article 52 - Modification and Waiver	67
Article 53 - Overpayment to City Employees and Repayment of Funds	68
Article 54 - Conduct of Elections	69
Article 56 - Core Instructor Pay	69
Article 57 - Drug and Alcohol Testing Program	69
Article 58 - Catastrophic Leave Plan	74
Article 59 - Side Letters	76
Article 60 - Mileage Reimbursement	77
Article 61 - Special Pay for Administrative Assignments	77
Article 62 - Shift Differential	77
Article 63 - Specialty Pays	77
Article 64 - Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act.	79
Article 65 - Employee Organizational Leave	88
Article 66 - Labor-Management Committee	88
Article 67 - Line of Duty Death	89
Article 68 - Effect of MOU	89
Article 69 - Bereavement Leave	89
Article 70 - Agency Shop and Dues Deduction	89
Article 71 - Use of City Email	94
Article 72 - Volunteers	94
Article 74-  Discretionary Leave for Fiscal Years 2014 - 2018	95
Appendix A - Interim Defined Contribution Plan	96
Appendix B - Exhibits A, B, and C to FY 2011 Salary Ordinance	100
SUBJECT INDEX

Agency Shop (Article 70)	89
Annual Leave (Article 18)	14
Badges (Article 17)	13
Bereavement Leave (Article 69)	89
Bilingual Pay (Article 16)	12
Board of Directors (Article 20)	16
Call-Back Pay (Article 29)	37
Catastrophic Leave Plan (Article 58)	74
Conduct of Elections (Article 54)	69
Copies of the MOU (Article 42)	54
Core Instructor Pay (Article 56)	69
Cost Of Living Annuity (Article 44)	55
Court Pay (Article 30)	37
Departmental Procedures - Advance Notice (Article 38)	44
Discretionary Leave for Fiscal Years 2014 - 2018 (Article 74)	95
DROP (Article 5, 44)	2, 55
Drug and Alcohol Testing Program (Article 57)	69
Dues Deduction (Article 70)	89
Educational Incentive (Article 15)	11
Effect of MOU (Article 68)	89
Employee Organizational Leave (Article 65)	88
Employee Representation (Article 37)	43
Exchange Of Days Off Between Employees (Article 11)	7
Field Training Officer Pay (Article 28)	36
Fiscal Year 2011 Salary Ordinance-Exhibits A, B, and  C (Appendix B)	100
Flexible Benefits Plan (Article 13)	8
Flight Pay (Article 40)	47
Formal Representation (Article 21)	17
Grievance Procedure (Article 24)	22
Holidays (Article 8)	4
Implementation (Article 3)	1
Industrial Leave (Article 14)	11
Information on New Employees (Article 12)	8
Labor-Management Committee (Article 66)	88
Line of Duty Death (Article 67)	89
Long Term Disability Plan (Article 45)	62
Management's Rights (Article 9)	6
Mileage Reimbursement (Article 60)	77
Military Leave (Article 27)	33
Modification and Waiver (Article 52)	67
No Discrimination Policy (Article 10)	7
Out-Of-Class Assignments (Article 23)	20
Overpayment to City Employees (Article 53)	68
Overtime (Article 32)	39
Parties to Agreement (Article 1)	1
Payroll Electronic Deposit (Article 36)	43
Personnel Rules and Regulations (Article 27)	33
POA Access (Article 22)	19
POA Representation (Article 35)	42
Preferred Shift Selection (Article 50)	67
Probation (Article 38, 47)	44, 65
Provisions of Law (Article 7)	3
Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights (POBOR) Procedures (Article 41) 48 Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act (Article 64)	79
Recognition (Article 2)	1
Repayment of Funds (Article 53)	68
Renegotiation (Article 5)	2
Reopeners (Article 46)	62
Retirement (Article 44)	55
Interim Defined Contribution Plan (Appendix A)	96
Salaries (Article 25)	27
Scope of Representation (Article 6)	3
Seniority (Article 43)	54
Shift Differential (Article 62)	77
Sick Leave and Annual Leave Reimbursement (Article 19)	16
Side Letters (Article 59)	76
Special Pay for Administrative Assignments (Article 61)	77
Specialty Pays (Article 63)	77
Stand-By Compensation (Article 31)	38
Starting Salary (Article 34)	42
Term of Agreement (Article 4)	1
Transportation Incentives (Article 49)	66
Tuition Refund Plan (Article 39)	44
Uniforms and Safety Equipment (Article 26)	28
Use of City Email (Article 71)	94
Volunteers (Article 72)	94
Wellness (Article 48)	66
Work Schedules (Article 33)	41
ARTICLE 1 PARTIES TO AGREEMENT
This Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is made and entered into on by and between the City of San Diego (City), and the San Diego Police Officers Association (POA).

ARTICLE 2 RECOGNITION
City formally recognizes POA as the exclusive representative for all employees in the Police Unit and Police Management Unit. This MOU applies to  all classifications listed below except as the units may be amended in accordance with City's Employee-Employer Relations Policy.

Police Unit:
Police Recruit Police Officer I Police Officer II Police Officer III Police Detective
Police Agent (Terminal) Police Sergeant
Police Management Unit: Police Lieutenant
Police Captain
Community Relations assistant to the Police Chief

ARTICLE 3 IMPLEMENTATION
This MOU constitutes a mutual recommendation by the  Parties to the San Diego City Council (City Council) and/or the  Civil Service Commission.   This MOU will be of no force or effect until ratified and approved as appropriate  by City Council and/or Civil Service Commission.

ARTICLE 4 TERM OF AGREEMENT
The term of this MOU will commence at 12:01 a.m. on July 1, 2015. This MOU will
expire and otherwise be fully terminated at 11:59 p.m. on June 30, 2020.

ARTICLE 5 RENEGOTIATION
    A. In the event POA desires to meet and confer in good faith on the provisions of a successor MOU, it will serve upon the City its written request to commence meeting and conferring in good faith, as well as its written non-economic proposals for successor MOU by October 2, 2019. POA will submit its economic proposals no later than January 8, 2020.  Upon  receipt  of the written notice and proposals, meet and confer over non-economic proposals will begin no later than November 6, 2019, and meet and confer over economic proposals will begin no later than January 22, 2020.
    B. The City agrees to notify POA by October 16, 2019 of its non-economic proposals and will submit its economic proposals no later than January 22, 2020.   If federal or state governments  take action that  has a direct  effect upon the areas which fall within the scope of representation, the City may submit proposals concerning these areas at later dates. Any terms and conditions of this MOU, not subject to this reopener provision shall remain in force and effect. The impasse hearing will take place in advance of the first reading of the salary ordinance for Fiscal Year 2020.
    C. The City will request the City Council to schedule an impasse hearing if necessary after 5:00 p.m. on a regular work day in order to permit POA Bargaining Unit members the opportunity to attend and testify.

    D. Unless otherwise agreed to, the parties agree that POA's final economic and non-economic offers are due by February 19, 2020 and the City's final economic and non-economic offers are due March 5, 2020. POA agrees to provide the City a written statement of its positions regarding any issues should there be impasse.

    E. City contends that the Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP) is an employment benefit subject to modification through the meet and confer process. Despite POA's disagreement with this contention, the Parties agree that,  during the  term of this MOU, they will meet and confer over proposals to modify DROP to make DROP "cost free" to City. The Parties acknowledge that City's proposals will modify DROP to make DROP "cost free" as defined by City and may include any and all aspects of DROP, including but not limited to, all of the DROP alternative plan design proposals set forth in a study by Buck Consultants presented by City to POA on March 14, 2012, or any variations of the alternative proposals which changes numbers or percentages reflected in the Buck study. However, by agreeing to meet and confer regarding proposals to modify DROP, POA is not waiving its right to

challenge any proposed modification to DROP on the basis that it may impair a constitutionally protected, individually vested pension benefit, or on any other ground. POA further reserves its right to argue, despite any contrary assertion by City, that the current unmodified DROP is, in fact, "cost free" within the meaning of reasonable actuarial  principles  and  appropriate margins of error. Moreover, in agreeing to meet and confer regarding proposals to modify DROP, neither Party is waiving its rights to make any legal arguments or pursue any legal action related to any proposed DROP modification.
In  the  event City and  POA reach agreement on any modifications to DROP, these modifications will become effective  on the  date  agreed  upon.  In  the event the Parties fail to reach an agreement, any impasse hearing  related  to DROP  will be conducted  in  accordance  with Council Policy 300-06 on a  date to be agreed upon by the Parties but in no event before January  1,  2013. However, any impasse hearing related to the Parties' meet and  confer  over DROP, including the aspects of DROP described  above,  will be separate from and  not combined  with any issues remaining  for impasse  in  connection  with the Parties' meet and confer process for a new MOU for Fiscal Year 2014.


ARTICLE 6
SCOPE OF REPRESENTATION
The scope of representation of POA includes all matters relating to employment conditions and employer/employee relations including, but not limited to, wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment as provided for and defined by the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act (MMBA), at California Government Code section 3500, et seq.

ARTICLE 7 PROVISIONS OF LAW
If any  section, subsection, subdivision,  sentence, clause or phrase of this MOU is for any  reason  held by a  court of competent  jurisdiction  to be illegal,  the  decision will not affect the remaining portion of the MOU.



    A. City Holidays.
ARTICLE 8 HOLIDAYS

        1. The City recognizes the following holidays, which are referred to in this Article as fixed or actual holidays:
            a. January 1;

            b. Third Monday in January, known as "Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday;"
            c. Third Monday in February, known as "Presidents' Day;"

            d. March 31, known as "Cesar Chavez Day;"
            e. Last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day;"
            f. July 4;

            g. First Monday in September known as "Labor Day;"
            h. November 11, known as "Veteran's Day;"
            i. Fourth Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day;"
            j. December 25; and

            k. Every	day	appointed	by	City	Council	for	a	public	fast, thanksgiving or holiday.

        2. If  January 1, March 31, July 4, November 11, or December 25 falls on a Sunday, the following Monday is the City-observed holiday. And if any of these dates falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday is the City-observed holiday.
    B. Payment for Holiday Worked.

        1. Holiday Worked Premium Pay: An employee, who is regularly scheduled to work on an actual holiday or a City-observed holiday and performs work, will receive overtime compensation, of time and one half, for all hours worked on the actual holiday or the City­ observed holiday, but not both. The employee will also receive straight time pay equal to the amount of hours of one work day as holiday compensation. An employee may not collect Holiday Worked Premium Pay for both the actual holiday and the City-observed holiday.
        2. Holiday Worked Day Off Pay: An employee, who is not regularly scheduled to work an actual holiday or City-observed holiday, but works either day, will receive time and one half pay for all hours worked on the actual or City-observed holiday in excess of the employee's 40 hour work week.
    C. Payment for Actual or City-Observed Holiday Not Worked.
        1. Holiday Scheduled Pay: An employee, who is regularly scheduled to work on an  actual holiday  or  City-observed  holiday,  but  elects to take the day off  with supervisor  approval  or is directed  to take  the day off, will receive straight time pay equal to the amount of hours of one regular work day. An employee may not  collect  Holiday Scheduled Pay for both the actual holiday and the City-observed holiday. An employee, who is not scheduled to work on an actual holiday or a City-observed  holiday and  does not  work, is not entitled to Holiday Scheduled Pay.
        2. Holiday Credit On Day Off: Notwithstanding paragraph C.1 above, effective June 30, 2020, when an actual holiday or City-observed holiday falls on an employee's regularly scheduled day off, the employee will receive pay for eight hours at his or her straight time rate of pay or an equal amount of compensatory time off. An employee may not collect Holiday Credit On Day Off for both the actual holiday and the City-observed holiday.
    D. Special Rules for City-Observed Holidays.
The  following  rules  apply  when  the  actual  holiday  and  the	City­ observed holiday are different days:
a.Officers, who have the City-observed holiday off and are regularly scheduled to work on the actual holiday, will treat  the  actual holiday as the holiday for purposes of collecting "Holiday Worked Premium Pay." In the alternative, officers may take the day off as a "Holiday Scheduled" and  receive straight  time  pay, if approved by a supervisor.
b. Officers, who work on the City-observed holiday, as a regularly scheduled day, and volunteer  to  work  on  the  actual  holiday, which is not  a regularly scheduled  day, will receive straight time pay on the  actual holiday and  Holiday Worked  Premium  Pay on the City-observed holiday.
    E. Floating Holiday.

In each fiscal year covered by the term of this MOU, each eligible employee available for a duty assignment on July 1 (as defined in





Personnel Manual Index Code H-2)  will accrue credit for ten (10) hours of holiday time.  Each employee accruing such time will schedule his or her floating holiday to comply with the following conditions:
        1. Employee must schedule the floating holiday prior to June 1;

        2. The floating holiday must be a one-time absence and it must be used before the last day of the last full pay period in June; and

        3. The floating holiday must be taken at a time convenient to the employee's appointing authority.

ARTICLE 9 MANAGEMENT'S RIGHTS
    A. The rights of City include, but are not limited to:

        1. The exclusive right to determine the mission of its constituent departments, commissions, and boards;
        2. Set standards of service;
        3. Determine  procedures	and standards of selection for employment and promotion;
        4. Direct its employees;
        5. Take disciplinary action for just cause;
        6. Relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons;

        7. Maintain the efficiency of government operations;
        8. Determine	the	methods,	means,	technology	and	personnel	by	which government operations are to be conducted;

        9. Determine the content of job classifications;
        10. Take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and 11.Exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and technology
of performing its work.
    B. The exercise of these rights does not preclude employees or their representatives from meeting and conferring or meeting and consulting as required by law with City representatives about the practical consequences that decisions on these
matters  may  have  on  wages,	hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.

ARTICLE 10
NO DISCRIMINATION POLICY
It is agreed that neither City nor POA will discriminate against any employee based on any of the protected classes or categories listed in City's Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Policy-Annual Statement or POA membership or activity. It is further agreed that no employee will be discriminated against because of exercising his or her rights specified in the Employee-Employer Relations Policy.  POA and City agree that they support the current policies of City as to affirmative action and Equal Employment Opportunity, and City further agrees to meet and confer as required by state law on any changes in these policies.

ARTICLE 11
EXCHANGE OF DAYS OFF BETWEEN EMPLOYEES
It is the  policy of the  San  Diego Police Department (Department) to allow employees of the same rank to exchange days off under the following conditions:

    A. Both parties to the exchange  must be willing to take the exchange  and  must have the approval of the immediate supervisors concerned.
    B. Generally speaking, exchanges of days off will be kept within the division, section, watch, and detail unless, on an individual basis, the commands of the parties to the exchange otherwise agree.
    C. When practical, requests for an  exchange of days off should be made in writing at least five (5) working days prior to the first day of exchange.
    D. An officer must report for the exchanged days off and with the exception of illness, an officer who otherwise fails to report will be carried absent without leave.
    E. To avoid administrative problems, an exchange of days off must be made within the same payroll period by both parties.
    F. These exchanges must be made in accordance with the FLSA, when applicable.
ARTICLE 12 INFORMATION ON NEW EMPLOYEES
    A. Whenever City hires a Police Recruit or sworn Police Officer as a new employee, it  will inform POA in writing of such employment,  giving the  name, date of hire and job classification of the new employee.
    B. City agrees to use its best efforts to inform POA in all instances when an employee represented by POA retires from City, giving the name, job classification and date of retirement.

ARTICLE 13 FLEXIBLE BENEFITS PLAN
        A. An Internal Revenue Service (IRS) qualified cafeteria-style benefits program called the  Flexible Benefits Plan (FBP) is offered to all eligible employees. The FBP provides a variety of tax-free benefit options. "Eligible employee" means any employee in one-half, three-quarter, or full-time status. "Eligible employee" excludes all employees in an hourly status. Eligible employees must have no less than forty (40) hours of compensated time during each pay period in order to receive City-paid benefits. If an eligible employee has less than forty (40) hours of compensated time during a pay period, the eligible employee will have the right to continue his or her benefits by paying City the full cost to continue any or all  of the  employee's benefits  during that period. In the case of Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) approved absences, City will continue to pay for the employee's health, life and dental insurance for up to twelve (12) weeks per year in accordance with FMLA requirements.
        B. City's contribution to the FBP, effective July 1, 2010, will be based on the level of health insurance coverage selected by the eligible employee. City's contribution to FBP will be prorated according to the percentage of time worked if the employee works less than full-time status.
            1. The FBP annual allotment amounts for employees in the Police Unit for Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2020 are as follows:
                a. Health Waiver (for employees who have other comprehensive  health coverage) - $7,605
                b. Employee only - $9,942
                c. Employee and Children - $11,919
                d. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner - $12,385
                e. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner & Children - $16,700




            2. The FBP annual allotment amounts for employees in the Police Management Unit for Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2020 are as follows:
                a. Health Waiver (for employees who have other comprehensive  health coverage) - $10,605
                b. Employee only - $12,942
                c. Employee and Children- $14,919
                d. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner -  $15,385
                e. Employee and Spouse/Domestic Partner & Children- $19,700
            3. In addition to the FBP annual allotment amounts set forth in paragraphs B.1. and B.2., employees covered by this MOU with eight
(8) or more years of service as a sworn police officer as of the last full pay period ending day in April  of each Fiscal Year,  will receive  on the first full pay period of the fiscal year, an additional allotment for flexible benefits as follows:

a.  Fiscal Year 2016 -
$2,900
b. Fiscal Year 2017 -
$4,900
c.  Fiscal Year 2018 -
$11,400
d.  Fiscal Year 2019 -
$9,317
e. Fiscal Year 2020 -
$6,728
            4. For laterals, years of service includes continuous time served as a sworn police officer at another law enforcement agency and/or the City. For employees covered by this MOU who  were police recruits for the City, years of service includes the time service as a Police Recruit.
        C. All  unused  amounts of flexible  benefits  will be paid out bi-annually on the last day of the first pay period of December and the last day of the first pay-period of July.
        D. The benefits available through FBP and the respective annual costs of the benefits are reflected in the Flexible Benefits Summary Highlights booklet provided to each employee each year of the MOU. POA will be allowed to offer two (2) Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs (ALADS) HMO plans. It will be POA's and/or ALADS' responsibility to inform the  participants and City of cost changes to be effective for January 1 coverage. Such notice must
be provided to City's Risk Management no later than October 1 of the year prior to the coverage effective date in order for changes to be made to City's OneSD system for deductions from participants' paychecks beginning December.
        E. It is the intent of the Parties that all plans offered in the FBP comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including IRS regulations as interpreted by City Attorney. All disputes over interpretation of this  Article  will  be submitted to the appropriate agencies for interpretation.
        F. The employee must select a health insurance plan unless the employee has other comprehensive health insurance.

        G. Eligible employees are credited with City's contribution on a biweekly basis as taxable earnings. To allow employees to receive Flexible Benefit allowance on a pre-tax basis, employees may designate a specific amount of pre-tax money (IRS restrictions apply) to be withheld from their paycheck for health, dental and v1s10n coverage and/or to reimburse eligible out-of-pocket Dental/MedicalNision (DMV) or Dependent Care expenses.
        H. These payroll deductions must be designated during the open enrollment period, are irrevocable, are subject to IRS regulations, and  monies  are forfeited if not used within the fiscal year.
        I. Eligible employees are  required  to enroll for their benefits each year during the designated open enrollment period. If an employee fails to complete enrollment within the open enrollment period, the employee's current options (or comparable plan if unavailable)  will be automatically continued at  the same level for the next year as if the employee had elected to keep them. Employees agree that City may make a payroll deduction for  all  elected benefit options. All payroll deductions, including DMV and Dependent Care reimbursement, will continue and may not be eligible to be stopped until the following open enrollment period.

        J. As part of the annual enrollment process for flexible benefits, all POA members are required to acknowledge that no amount of flexible benefit credits are included in "Base Compensation" under the SDCERS plan.

        K. It is agreed that POA fees for its  prepaid insurance plans will be remitted by the Risk Management in the aggregate amount according to the following procedure: Risk Management  will audit  and balance  the enrollment  and remit to POA, or its designee, the aggregate amount shown as soon as feasible within City Comptroller guidelines for processing Requests for  Direct Payment. POA will be responsible for collecting premiums from employees that were not collected due to the employee's non-pay status.
        L. The Parties agree to meet and discuss potential changes to health, dental  and vision  plans for POA represented  employees.  The  Parties will  discuss  options to lower costs to POA members, to include options for POA to become the exclusive provider for health, dental and vision plans for POA members and/or consolidation of City health plans. Potential options  will be  jointly  determined no later than December 1, 2016.  Any option  must conform  to all  applicable laws, including tax laws.

ARTICLE 14 INDUSTRIAL LEAVE
Industrial Leave benefits will be administered in accordance with Administrative Regulation  (AR)  63.00.   City will administer  benefits for industrial injuries incurred by employees covered by this MOU in  accordance  with  California  Labor  Code section 4850.

ARTICLE  15 EDUCATIONAL INCENTIVE
City agrees to continue the existing Educational Incentive Program as described in Department Procedure No. 5.13 except as set out below.
    A. Effective July 1, 2007, the benefit for Advanced POST Certificate shall be eight and one-half percent (8.5%) of employee's base rate, and the benefit for Intermediate POST Certificate shall be six percent (6%) of employee's base rate. These amounts are not cumulative.
    B. Effective July 1, 2009, for the  purpose of this Article only, those sworn officers in the classifications of Police Officer I, Police Officer II ("A," "C," and "D" steps only) and who possess an Advanced POST Certificate will receive $3.10 per hour. Police Officer I, Police Officer II ("A," "C," and "D" steps only) and who possess an Intermediate POST Certificate will receive $2.19  per hour. These calculations are based upon the Advanced and Intermediate POST percentages respectively, times the "E" Step salary of Police Officer II.
    C. Employees possessing the Advanced POST Certificate who have completed at least sixty (60) college semester units or fifteen (15) years of service as a sworn officer with City will not be required to re-qualify to be eligible for the Educational Incentive Payment. Employees who have completed less than sixty
(60) college units or fifteen (15) years of service will be required to re-qualify in accordance with Police Department Procedure No. 5.13. Employees with an Intermediate POST Certificate with fifteen years of service as a sworn officer or who meet applicable educational requirement will not be required to re-qualify.
    D. POA agrees to establish and actively support a community service program.



    A. Ongoing Bilingual Services.
ARTICLE 16 BILINGUAL PAY

City agrees to continue a program which will provide ongoing extra compensation for employees whose job assignment requires ability to communicate orally in Spanish, Tagalog, Somali, Korean, American Sign Language, Chinese, Indochinese, Russian, Arabic, or Farsi languages as well as  English. Participants  in  this program, who are certified by Personnel, and who are otherwise eligible, will receive three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee's base rate while in the job assignment requiring this additional skill. A claim by an  individual of arbitrary denial of bilingual pay is grievable.
    B. Incidental Bilingual Services.
        1. City agrees to provide bilingual compensation for the entire pay period for those eligible individuals (those who are not currently receiving ongoing bilingual pay for any language) who are requested or directed  by  a supervisor, manager, or Communications to provide translator services in a non-English language.
        2. A statement attached to the Personnel Change Notice from a supervisor will serve as certification for bilingual pay for the pay period.
        3. For the purpose of defining "incidental bilingual services rendered," any language other than English may qualify for incidental bilingual compensation.
        4. City reserves the right to establish criteria  which will enable candidates  in this program to qualify for the extra compensation.
        5. POA's request for City to consider expanding the number of languages recognized as eligible for continuing bilingual pay will be referred to the Multilingual Task Force for study and recommendations.
        6. Employees are  required to be periodically re-tested in order to ensure that their bilingual skills are  current.   In order to continue  receiving  bilingual pay, employees must pass a re-test on their non-English language.   The re­ test will be administered on City time by the  Personnel Department.   City may re-test an employee once every three (3) years thereafter.
        7. The Parties may discuss the testing process at the POA Labor Management Committee and a representative from Personnel may  be invited to participate during those discussions.








    A. Flat Badges.
ARTICLE 17 BADGES

City agrees to provide flat badges for sale by Department to employees. The flat badge remains the property of City and, at the time of employee termination, the badge must be returned to the Department without reimbursement to the employee. However, if the employee is retiring and eligible for a retired badge, the Department will exchange the flat badge for a retired flat badge.
    B. Retired Badges.
        1. Upon a service or disability·retirement, an eligible officer has the following options:
            a. If the officer has only a breast badge, City will have the officer's name tag and original breast badge encased in acrylic at  no cost to the officer.  In lieu of having the badge encased, the officer can have the breast badge modified to or exchanged for a breast badge with a retired scroll in place of the badge number.

            b. If the officer has both a breast and flat badge, the officer has the following choices:
                1) City will have the officer's name tag and original breast badge encased in acrylic at no cost to the officer and have his or her flat badge exchanged for or modified to a retirement badge.

                2) City will have the officer's name tag and original flat badge encased in acrylic at no cost to the officer and have his or her breast badge exchanged for or modified to a retired badge.

                3) City will have both the breast and flat badge exchanged for or modified to a retired badge.

        2. Officers who do not have a flat badge for exchange or encasement have the option to purchase a retired flat badge.

        3. In addition to paragraph B.1.a and B.1.b., City will provide to POA, at  no cost, a flat badge of appropriate rank, to POA for purposes of ceremonial presentation to the individual, by POA, upon retirement.
ARTICLE 18 ANNUAL LEAVE
    A. Employees covered by this MOU will accumulate annual leave time as follows (references to number of years are to fully completed years of service):

        1. 1-5 years of employment
        2. 6-15 years of employment

        3. 16 or more years
5.24 hours per pay period
6.77 hours per pay period

8.31 hours per pay period

    B. Appointing Authorities are responsible for arranging annual leave so that adequate personnel are available to carry on necessary City work.
    C. As far as is practicable, employees should be permitted to schedule annual leave at times most acceptable to the employee. Scheduled annual leave  will be selected by employees within each division, watch, bureau, section, or unit, as is applicable, based upon their seniority by rank within the Department. Employees who are transferred at their request, or promoted, may be required to modify their scheduled annual leave.
    D. Employees should be encouraged to take regular annual leave but  they will not be required to take time off against their will. Any leave days in excess of the authorized number earned for that year may be taken only at the convenience of the Department.

    E. 1.  The maximum accumulation of annual leave for employees hired before July 1, 1994, with less than fifteen (15) years of service is six hundred (600) hours. Annual leave credits may be accumulated over the six hundred (600) hours limit until an employee's annual "accrual date" (which is normally the day and month when originally hired). The maximum accumulation of annual leave for employees with fifteen (15) or more years of service is seven hundred (700) hours.
    2. For employees hired on or after July 1, 1994, the maximum accumulation of annual leave is three hundred fifty (350) hours.

    3. If, on an employee's anniversary  date, an employee's leave balance exceeds the  applicable cap, accrual of additional annual leave, whether in hours or cash equivalent, will cease. However, once an employee's annual leave balance falls below the applicable cap, accrual of annual leave will resume. Employees will be provided reasonable opportunity to take time off to ensure leave  accrual is not interrupted.   In unique situations when workload  does not permit an employee to take time off, Department will have discretion to grant a ninety-day extension to the employee to use excess leave before the cease to accrue will be implemented.




    F. Department annual leave periods will be divided into one-week increments. Annual leave schedules are comprised of fifty-two (52) one-week increments for each separate rank per division, watch, bureau, section, or unit, providing, however, that the Department may establish an equitable formula relative to Lieutenants and above to accommodate command staffing when a conflict exists in annual leave scheduling. Employees may elect to take annual leave in increments of one day or longer. Employees will annually be required to select a vacation period in advance on the basis of seniority within their division, watch, bureau, section or unit. The initial selection of leave will be the full regular annual leave or the  first segment of the  leave. After the  initial selection has been completed by all employees,  those seeking to take more than one segment of leave can select their second segment from those periods remaining. Those employees desiring a third leave segment will select their third choice after those choosing a second segment have completed their selection, etc. Each Departmental unit will establish an equitable formula to predetermine  the  limit or the number of officers that will be allowed to use annual leave credit during each leave period. The limit may be lowered for the few selected periods of anticipated heavy police work load, i.e., July 4 and Labor Day weekend.
    G. All employees, upon separation, are entitled to receive pay for unused annual leave credits.

    H. Leave provisions included under item I and J below will be accounted for separately.
    I. Pre-approved annual leave, sick leave or compensatory time off properly used for personal, family, or dependent illnesses will not be subject to disciplinary action.
    J. Approved unscheduled annual or sick leave properly used for family, dependent, or domestic partner illnesses will be considered as a separate category when reviewing employee performance with regard to attendance and absenteeism issues.   Should  City, for good and  sufficient  reasons,  determine that an employee is abusing this leave provision, City may request a bona fide doctor's statement from the employee to substantiate illness.
    K. Employees may make up to two requests for payment in lieu of annual leave each fiscal year. The total of both requests cannot  exceed  125 hours each fiscal year.

    L. Benefits While on Special Leave Without Pay (SLWOP).
        1. All benefits while on SLWOP will be coordinated or offset by benefits the employee receives under any other City program, including but not limited to LTD and FMLA.
        2. After one year on SLWOP, City may charge the employee a 2% administrative fee or offer continuation of benefits under COBRA.
        3. Employees will not be eligible to purchase City-sponsored Supplemental Life Insurance while on SLWOP.
    M. The Department can grant so-called "Red A" leave, which is approved unpaid leave, at Management's sole discretion, per Personnel Manual Index Code I-7.

ARTICLE 19
SICK LEAVE AND ANNUAL LEAVE REIMBURSEMENT
An eligible employee, upon retirement, or upon termination (other than death or discharge, including termination with eligibility for a deferred retirement), may request that payment for sick leave and annual leave reimbursement  be paid in either: (a) one full payment; or (b) one full payment at a specified date within the same calendar year of retirement.
    A. Unused Sick Leave (for employees hired prior to July 1, 1975 only).
An employee hired prior to July 1, 1975, will be reimbursed for his or her unused accumulated sick leave credit at his or her rate of pay at termination, in a lump sum, subject to the following conditions:

        1. Upon retirement or death, the employee is entitled to reimbursement for sick leave at fifty percent (50%) of his or her rate of pay.
        2. Upon termination, the employee is entitled to reimbursement for sick leave at twenty-five percent (25%) of his or her rate of pay.
    B. Unused sick leave is not paid if an employee is terminated for cause.




    A. Board of Directors.
ARTICLE 20
BOARD OF DIRECTORS

POA Board of Directors may represent employees in the processing of grievances subject to the  rules and procedures outlined in Section B.   Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this MOU, POA will furnish City with a written list identifying by name  and  assigned  work areas and including  shift assignments all members of the Board. The list will be kept current by POA.
    B. Handling Grievances.
        1. When an employee has a grievance, he or she may request that a Board member, with permission of his  or her supervisor,  investigate the grievance in his or her assigned work area and assist in its preparation and presentation. If no Board member is assigned to the employee's work area or
if the Board member assigned to the employee's work area is not available at the time the grievant makes his or her request, another Board member may investigate the grievance.
        2. After notifying and receiving approval of the immediate supervisor, a Board member will be allowed reasonable time off during working hours, without loss of time or pay to investigate, to prepare and present the grievances. The immediate supervisor will authorize the Board member to leave his or her work assignment unless compelling circumstances require refusal of such permission. In that case, the immediate supervisor will inform the Board member of the  reasons release time was denied and  establish an alternate time when the Board member can reasonably be expected to be released from his or her work assignment.
        3. When a Board member needs to contact an employee at his or her work location, the  Board member  will first contact the  immediate supervisor of that employee, advise the supervisor of the nature of the business, and obtain the permission of the supervisor to meet with the employee. The immediate supervisor will make the employee available promptly unless compelling circumstances prohibit the employee's availability, in which case the supervisor will notify the Board member when he or she  can reasonably expect to contact the employee.

        4. A Board member's interview or discussions with an employee on City time will be handled expeditiously.
        5. The Department will provide POA prior notice before a Board member is transferred or changed to a different work shift. The requirement of prior notice to POA will not be construed as limiting City in its prerogatives to transfer or change the work shift of a Board member.
    C. Board of Directors Meetings.
Members of the Board will be permitted to attend, while on duty, meetings of the Board of Directors.

ARTICLE 21 FORMAL REPRESENTATION
    A. POA may select three (3) representatives to attend scheduled meetings with the Management on subjects within the scope of representation during regular work hours without loss of compensation, except for annual meet and confer sessions concerning economic matters, when nine (9) POA representatives may  be released from the on-duty work schedules.
        1. In addition, POA may also select a representative to  attend  City  Council, Council Committees, Retirement Board,  and  Civil  Service  Commission hearings during regular work hours, without loss  of  compensation,  when subjects within the scope of representation are being discussed.
        2. Normally,  requests for such release  will be made of the   Chief  of Police or his or her designee at least two (2) working days in advance of the  meetings, provided further that:

            a. Names of all designated representatives will be given to the Chief of Police or his or her designee at the time the request is made.
            b. No representative will leave his or her duty station or assignment without specific approval of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.

            c. All meetings are subject to scheduling by City in a manner consistent with the operating needs and work schedules.
    B. POA maintains an Employee Representative Program. The purpose of the program is to provide sworn employees with appropriate representation and assistance during disciplinary actions and in matters which may lead  to discipline. The members of the program are personnel from throughout the Department  who have volunteered to serve, and  have been trained in the duties of employee representatives. Employee representatives may appear with employees during:

        1. Any investigatory, fact-finding, or appeal meeting which suspension (except emergency suspension), discharge, disciplinary transfer; or
may result m demotion,	or

        2. The required discussion or the appeal of any document, including an Annual Performance Evaluation that does not meet standards or is a Supplemental Performance Report, written warning, or reprimand which may be made part of the employee's permanent record, and/or which may be used as a basis for subsequent discipline.
    C. Employee representatives may also assist employees in preparmg written reports, including Department reports, where information contained in them may be used as a basis for punitive or disciplinary action against an employee. The Department and POA have agreed that the employee representatives will notify their supervisors each time they are assigned a matter for representation. Representatives are allowed two (2) hours of on-duty time to prepare for participation in interviews, interrogations, and appeal hearings for each case to which they are assigned. This preparation time is in addition to any on-duty time actually spent in the interview, interrogation or appeal meeting. All supervisors should note that the two-hour authorized preparation time is
provided to the employee representatives only, not to the employees being represented.
    D. The Department fully supports the Employee Representative Program. Therefore, supervisors are encouraged to cooperate as much as possible with the representatives in scheduling employee interviews, counseling sessions, and hearings of any appeals of disciplinary actions. In addition, supervisors should provide representatives with all the information the representatives request to which they are entitled by law and by Department policy and  procedure which the  representatives need to perform  their  duties.   All information obtained by the representatives during the course of their duties as representative will be maintained in the strictest confidence.   Because they are acting as agents of POA's attorneys while representing employees, the information gained by the representatives is protected by the attorney/client privilege and its disclosure is prohibited.
    E. POA may designate up to forty (40) Employee Representatives and will provide the Assistant Chief in charge of personnel service with a current list of representatives.
    F. Effective July 1,  2012, four (4) hours of release time, per quarter, is authorized for POA's trustee representative for the purpose of attending San Diego Employees Retiree Medical Trust board meetings. No overtime is authorized. Additional release time may be granted subject to the approval of the Human Resources Director.

ARTICLE 22 POAACCESS
    A. Authorized POA representatives who are not City employees (such as business agents or attorneys) will be granted access to work locations in which employees covered by this MOU are employed, for the purpose of conducting grievance investigations and observing working conditions.
    B. Authorized POA representatives seeking access to work locations will first request access from the appropriate Department Management representative, at which time the representative will inform the Department Management representative of the purpose of the visit. The Department Management representative may deny access to a work location if, in his or her judgment, it is determined that a visit will unduly interfere with the operations  of  the department or facility. In that event, the Department Management representative will recommend an alternative time for the visit.
    C. Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this MOU, POA will provide Department Management  a written list of all authorized representatives. The
list will be kept current by POA. Access to work locations under this MOU will be granted only to representatives on the current list.
    D. Authorized POA representatives will be given access to non-security work locations during working hours to conduct grievance investigations and  to observe working conditions on the condition that POA representatives will comply with the regulations established in this Article, and POA representatives will not interfere with work operations of any City department. Representatives have the right to meet with employees  during coffee,  rest, or lunch breaks  at City facilities that may be available.

ARTICLE 23
OUT-OF-CLASS ASSIGNMENTS
    A. Policy. The following applies to all out-of-class assignments:
        1. The term  "out-of-class  assignment"  (OCA)  means  the  temporary  transfer  of an employee to a vacant position or to a position where the incumbent of the position is unable to perform the duties of the position because of absence or disability. This OCA position must be officially allocated by the Civil Service Commission to a class other than the one presently occupied by the employee. The class may be at a higher, lower, or the same pay rate as the class  the employee presently occupies. However, the employee will continue to be paid at his or her current pay rate.
        2. Acceptable reasons for OCA are:
            a. Non-availability of properly classified employees to fill a temporary vacancy to which the regular incumbent is expected to return.
            b. Assignment to light duty when required by City's examining physician or a doctor designated by the Workers' Compensation unit.

            c. The temporary filling of a vacant position, for which there  is  no permanent incumbent, pending certification of eligibles. For purposes of this regulation, a vacancy will be deemed to exist upon reclassification of an existing position.

            d. The temporary filling of a vacant position for in-service training, or in connection with a formalized training program for the purpose of improving opportunities for promotion. Training assignments must be approved by the Personnel Director regardless of duration. Appointments made in accordance with City's career advancement  program, as outlined in Personnel Manual Index Code D-3, are not OCA and are not eligible for extra compensation.
        3. An OCA may be made, if in the  opinion of the  Appointing Authority,  such action is necessary for the  proper functioning  of the  Department.  However, after filling a vacancy by  an  OCA -assignment,  the  Appointing  Authority  is not required to fill the vacancy caused by such assignment.
            a. Appointing Authorities may select any employee in  non-represented classes and in classifications in the Police, Administrative Support and Field Service, Professional, Supervisory, and Technical  representation units to fill an OCA, using eligible lists, availability,  training, seniority, and other relevant factors as guidelines.
            b. OCA will not exceed  sixty (60) consecutive  calendar  days  nor will a series of OCA to any one vacant position exceed sixty (60) calendar days without approval by the Personnel Director.  OCA will not be made to avoid filling a position with a limited or permanent appointment.
    B. Eligibility For Additional Compensation.
        1. Employees will receive compensation for OCA to higher classes only when the assignment  has been continuous for thirty (30) days.   Compensation begins on the thirty-first (31st) continuous day and from that day forward. The first (1st)  through thirtieth (30th)  days are paid at  the employee's regular rate of pay.
        2. Employees will be compensated for OCA at the rate of the higher paid class after thirty (30) cumulative days. Compensation would begin on the thirty­ first (31st) day assigned. To calculate when this standard has been met for employees on alternate work schedules,  thirty (30) cumulative  days is equal to one hundred-seventy-six (176) regular (non-overtime) hours worked out-of­ class in a single classification. OCA will accrue on a fiscal year basis and will not be carried forward into the next fiscal year, except in the circumstances cited in City Memorandum entitled "Policy on Out-of-Class Assignments" dated July 16, 1997.
    C. Procedure.
        1. The Appointing Authority will forward Form CS-71 (Out-Of-Class Assignment) to the  Personnel Director,  no later than the first day of each OCA for which additional compensation will be paid.
        2. The payroll procedure for determining an employee's pay for an OCA will be the  same as that used when an employee is promoted to the same class from an eligible list established by a promotional examination.
ARTICLE 24 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
The purpose of this grievance procedure is to provide employees covered by this MOU the  broadest possible opportunity to resolve work-related  problems through an effective administrative procedure. POA and City recognize a mutual obligation to faithfully uphold the spirit and purpose of the grievance procedure.
    A. Definitions.

        1. A grievance subject to this Grievance Procedure is any disagreement concerning the  interpretation or application  of this MOU, including whether a matter covered by Article  46 has  been interpreted or applied against POA or an employee in a manner violating that Article.
        2. Actions which are covered in City Management Rights Article of this MOU are not grievable, but this will not preclude employees or their representatives from consulting with Management about the practical consequences such actions may have on wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. In addition, actions covered by another appeals process as described in the Civil Service Rules, Personnel Manual, or this MOU are not grievable and will not be processed through this Grievance Procedure.
        3. If the  grievance system is abused by an  unreasonable number of submittals by one individual or group obviously designed to thwart orderly processing or if the grievances are patently irrelevant, or incomprehensible, they will be rejected as "nongrievable" and returned to the grievant.
        4. Wherever  applicable, the  term "working days" means the  actual work days of the individual on whom the time limits are imposed.
    B. Policy.

        1. Employees have the right to use this Grievance Procedure without fear of reprisal. No negative employment action will be taken against any employee as a result of the use of this grievance procedure.
        2. Employees may represent themselves or select whomever they wish to represent them at any or all steps in the grievance procedure.
            a. The employee has the right to the assistance  of a  POA representative in the investigation, preparation, and presentation of a written grievance.
            b. Employees may have no more than one City employee and one non-City employee as representatives for grievance hearings.
            c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this MOU, an employee may not select a supervisor in the direct chain of command, as a representative, except that a supervisor may select another supervisor as a representative.
        3. Grievances may be initiated by the employee, or by a formally recognized employee organization, on the employee's behalf or by the recognized employee organization for this unit on its own behalf, on matters that directly involve the interpretation or application of the specific terms or provisions of this MOU. If an employee chooses to have representation on any formal grievance concerning a matter that directly involves the interpretation or application of the specific terms and provisions of this MOU, such representation must come from POA.
        4. The employee's or employee organization's first contact regarding job and working conditions is with the immediate supervisor and supervisors will attempt to settle grievances informally at this level.
        5. A grievance will normally be presented and processed on City time, and a grievant attending a grievance meeting on his or her own behalf on City time will not lose pay. In scheduling the time, place, and  duration  of  any grievance meeting, the  employee,  a POA representative and Management will give due consideration to all the participant's responsibilities in the essential operations of the Department. Management  has the unequivocal right to schedule hearings as convenient. Hearings may or may not be held during an employee's normal shift. No overtime pay will be given to the grievant. Representatives, witnesses, or other participants will receive overtime pay if ordered to be present by the Appointing Authority.
        6. Waivers and Time Limits.
            a. Failure by Management to reply to the employee's grievance within the time limits specified automatically processes the grievance to the next level.
            b. Any level of review, or any time limits established in this procedure, may be waived or extended for good cause and only by mutual agreement confirmed in writing.
            c. If an employee fails to appeal from one level to the next level, within the time limits established in this grievance procedure, the grievance will be considered settled on the basis of the last decision and the grievance will not be subject to further appeal or reconsideration.
            d. By mutual agreement, the grievance may revert to a pnor level for reconsideration.
            e. If a grievant fails to appear for a scheduled grievance meeting, such failure without excuse approved by the Appointing Authority will entitle Management to decide on the grievance without the presence of the grievant, or to schedule another meeting at the level (in which case the time requirements for hearing and decision are automatically waived). Failure to appear at two (2) meetings on the same grievance without an approved excuse automatically terminates the grievance and it is deemed denied.	The	grievance	will  not	be  subject	to   further	appeal or reconsideration.
            f. When a grievant is on approved leave the time limits established in this procedure will be suspended for the period of the leave.

            g. No grievance will be finally dismissed for an unexcused failure to appear at a scheduled hearing unless the grievant had been given twenty-four
(24) hours notice of the hearing.
            h. POA agrees to pursue all claims of violation of this MOU through the Grievance Procedure.   Resort to other remedies will not be pursued until all steps of the grievance procedure have been exhausted. If POA reasonably feels that an employee has suffered immediate and irreparable harm,  City and  POA agree that POA may directly contact the Mayor or his or her designee, the Human Resource Director, to seek a resolution prior to pursuing remedies outside  City. Contacting the Mayor or his or her designee, the Human Resource Director, will be considered to exhaust the Grievance Procedure in these cases.
    C. Procedures.

        1. General.
            a. Management of the Department has the responsibility to inform an employee of any limitation of a given level of Management's authority to fully resolve the grievance. In this regard, Management will:
                1) Supply the employee with the necessary information to process the grievance to the proper agency or authority.
                2) Advise an employee when any matter under submission is determined by Management as not grievable according to the definitions in section A above.  The "grievance" paperwork submitted by the employee will be returned to the employee  along with a  memorandum  explaining why the  matter is not grievable and  what alternative procedures,  if any, the employee may follow to process his or her grievance.
            b. When a group of identical grievances develop, only one grievance form will be submitted. The grievants may select not more than two (2) spokespersons who thereafter will be their representative "grievants."
The acceptance of a decision by the spokespersons at any step (or final decision if the grievance moves to Step 5) will be binding on all parties.
            c. A grievance will be recognized if it is brought to the attention of  the immediate supervisor  either  formally  or  informally  within  ten  (10) working days of the incident's occurrence.
            d. If the grievance is between the employee and his or her immediate supervisor, or where an upper level supervisor has made a decision on the subject of the dispute, Step 1 may be to the level above the level making the decision. The upper level supervisor has the discretion to remand the grievance to a lower level supervisor as Step 1. All remands will be in writing.
            e. To be recognized,  a  grievance  must  state the  nature  of  the  problem  and the remedy sought by the employee  or  POA.  In  the  event  that  the grievance is rejected for failure to clearly identify the problem or remedy, it may be amended by the grievant or POA.

            f. Members holding the rank of Police Captain will submit any grievance directly to Step 3.



    a. Step 1: At the employee's or employee organization's sole option, grievances may be presented to the  supervisor either orally or in  writing. If the grievance is presented orally, the procedure is informal and may be settled by an oral answer given within five (5) working days. If the grievance is presented in writing, the procedure is formal and the answer must be given in writing within five (5) working  days after submission. The written grievance must be clearly and precisely detailed including the specific grounds for the grievance, a listing of MOU articles allegedly violated not the remedies sought. Grievances that fail to meet these requirements will not be disqualified, but will be returned to the grievant for compliance with the foregoing requirements. In  such  cases,  the written answer must be given within five (5) working days after resubmission of the grievance.
    b. Step 2: If the problem cannot be solved at Step 1, the employee or employee organization may present the complaint in writing to the second level supervisor (if not done at Step 1) within five (5) working  days. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the grievance, a hearing will be held and the Management representative will give a written decision to the employee and POA representative.

    c. Step 3:	If  the	problem  is  not  resolved  at  Step  2,  the	employee or employee organization may submit the grievance to the division head
within five (5) working days. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the grievance, a hearing will be held and the division head will give written decision to the employee or POA representative. In smaller departments, this step is deleted.
    d. Step 4: If the problem cannot be solved in Step 3, the employee or employee organization may present the grievance  to  the  Department Head within five (5) working days. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the  grievance, a hearing will be held and the Department Head or his or her designee will give a written decision to the employee or POA representative. In non-managerial departments  this  will constitute  the final resolution of a grievance involving management policy or regulations.

    e. Step 5: Final Resolution of Grievance: If the grievance is still in dispute after Step 4, the employee or employee organization may request a further hearing, which at the discretion of the Management Team will take place before the Civil Service Commission, on matters over which the Commission has authority, or before the Mayor or his or her designee, by submitting the grievance within five (5) working days. (If it is determined that the hearing should be held before the Civil Service Commission, a fact-finding hearing to define the  issues in the grievance will be held by the Personnel Director with the employee and/or employee organization, prior to the date set for the Commission hearing. The grievance may be settled during such fact-finding hearing, if a mutually acceptable  solution is developed.) The decision of the Commission will be issued at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the hearing by the Personnel Director. In grievances answered by the Mayor or his or her designee, a hearing will be held and a written response given within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the appeal from Step 4. If the Mayor's office does not render a decision within forty five (45) days, and if there is no waiver of the time limits, the grievance will precede to Step 6. The employee or employee organization may only request a hearing before the Civil Service Commission in matters solely involving Civil Service Rules or the Personnel Manual.
    f. Step 6: Grievances arising out of the disagreement on interpretation or application of this MOU will follow City-wide grievance procedure. POA may formally request to continue the  grievance,  not later than ten (10) days following receipt of the answer at the final step of the grievance procedure (provided it was heard by the Mayor or his or her designee), by serving written notice upon the Management Team. The Management Team will refer the grievance to City Council for hearing and decision. City council will have six months from the date that POA serves written notice on the Management Team of its desire to have the grievance heard before City Council within which to calendar the grievance for hearing. If
City Council does not calendar the matter for consideration within the six
(6) month period, then the grievance will be considered granted.

ARTICLE 25 SALARIES
    A. From Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2018, consistent with San Diego Charter section 70.2, no base compensation, defined as base salary or wages paid on a regular bi-weekly basis for services performed, for any classification will be increased to an amount higher than the base compensation for that classification set forth in the 2011 Fiscal Year Salary Ordinance (San Diego Ordinance No. 0-19952, adopted on May 4, 2010). Exhibits A and B to the 2011 Fiscal Year Salary Ordinance, which are both related to the base salaries for the Classified Service, are  attached to this MOU and incorporated into this MOU. Exhibit A sets forth the base salaries for the Classified Service. Exhibit B sets forth the Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates. The parties agree that there will be no increases to the base salaries for the  classifications set forth in Exhibit A and B during the term of this MOU. The parties further agree that the creation of any new classifications during the term of this MOU must be consistent  with San Diego Charter section 70.2(c).  For reference, Exhibit C to the 2011 Fiscal Year Salary Ordinance, related to Classifications and Standard Salary Rates for the Unclassified Service, is also attached to this MOU.

Further,  during this period, no new compensation  will be added to the 2011 Fiscal Year Earnings Code Document, Exhibit A, which sets forth Wage Types Included in the Pensionable Wage Base.

Notwithstanding these agreements, the parties acknowledge that individual employees may receive promotions during the period from Fiscal Year 2016 through Fiscal Year 2018 under the authority of San  Diego Charter section 124 and all applicable Civil Service Rules, Personnel Regulations, and other provisions. Further, the parties acknowledge that individual employees may receive an  increase in pensionable  compensation,  within the limits set forth in Exhibit A or Exhibit  C to the  Fiscal Year 2011 Salary Ordinance,  under the authority of San Diego Charter sections 130 and all applicable Civil Service Rules, Personnel Regulations, and other applicable provisions.
    B. Effective the first full pay period following July 1, 2018, there will be a general salary increase of 3.3% for all employees covered by this MOU. The Fiscal Year 2019 salary tables for the classifications covered by this MOU will be modified to reflect this increase.

    C. Effective the first full pay period following July 1, 2019, there  will be a general salary increase of 3.3% for all employees covered by this
MOU. The Fiscal Year 2020 salary tables for the classifications covered by this MOU will be modified to reflect this increase.

    D. In the salary schedules for new employees, B step will be eliminated for new hires beginning July 1, 1994. Employees hired on or after July 1, 1994, will move from "A" step to "C" step after one (1) year for initial appointments as well as subsequent promotions, transfers, or other appointments. This represents an increase of approximately ten percent  (10%). Current employees will continue with the present five step salary schedule.

    E. FLSA Exempt Classes - Pursuant to the provisions of the FLSA the classification of Police Lieutenant and Police Captain are ineligible for premium overtime and will not be subject to the overtime provisions of this MOU.

ARTICLE 26
UNIFORMS AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT
    A. Department Issued Equipment.
        1. City will issue to each sworn officer:
            a. Handgun and Ammunition;
            b. Safety Helmet and Face Shield;
            c. Baton and Baton Holder;
            d. Badge;
            e. Protective Vest and Cover;
            f. Mace and Mace Holder;
            g. Flashlight;
            h. Department Identification Card;
            i. Name Tag;
            j. Whistle;
            k. Raincoat and Rain Boots; and
                I. Handcuffs and Case.
    B. Police Officer's Uniform and Equipment.
        1. Initial Requirement.

            a. Each Employee in this bargaining unit will be required to obtain and maintain, in a manner acceptable to City, the following items:

    1) Pants;
    2) Tie;

    3) Belt;
    4) Shirt, Short or Long Sleeve;

    5) Belt and Holster;
    6) Ammunition Pouch or Speed-loaders and Pouch; and
    7) Pistol Belt Keepers (4).

            b. Effective Fiscal Year 2016, City will provide Police Recruits an equipment allowance of $1,000 upon entry into the Academy and
$1,500 upon successful graduation  from the  academy so  long as the recruit is still employed by the City. These amounts are not included in "Base Compensation" under the SDCERS Plan.

        2. Maintenance and Upkeep.
            a. City will also pay those sworn members of the Department who have completed twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I as of September 1, and who are available for duty assignments on September 1, the sum of
$900.00 for the maintenance and replacement of the uniforms and equipment described in Paragraph B.1. Sworn officers of the Department who have completed twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I as of September 1, but who are on leaves of absence, including injury leave, will be eligible for this payment upon their return to duty. Police Officers who complete twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I after September 1, will receive the sum of $900.00 as of the day they complete twelve (12) months as a Police Officer I. No sworn member will receive more than $900.00 during the fiscal year for "maintenance and upkeep" of the uniforms and equipment described in Paragraph B.1., except as provided in Paragraph b., below.
            b. Effective Fiscal Year 2016, employees covered by this MOU with eight (8) or more years of service as a sworn police officer as of August 15, will receive an additional uniform/equipment/cleaning
allowance of $2,100, prior to the first full pay period in September of 2015.
    1) For laterals, years of service includes continuous time served as a sworn police officer at another law enforcement agency and/or the City.  The Parties may discuss the qualifications to be considered a sworn police officer at the POA Labor Management Committee.

    2) For employees covered by this MOU who were Police Recruits for the City, years of service includes the time  served  as a Police Recruit.
    3) Twice a year, the City will review an employee's  years  of service to determine  eligibility  for this allowance.  The  City will determine an employee's eligibility  based  on  an employee's  years of service as of August 15 and  March 15.  If an employee is first eligible as of August 15, the  City will pay the annual allowance  in the first full pay period in September. If an employee is eligible as of March 15, the City will pay the annual allowance in the first full pay period in April. An employee covered by this MOU will  receive  this  allowance only once per calendar year.
    4) These amounts are not included in "Base Compensation" under the SDCERS Plan.
        3. In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, officers assigned to Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) duty will receive the sum of
$400.00 for the reimbursement of the initial purchase of uniforms and equipment so authorized by the Department upon assignment. City will also pay those sworn officers assigned to SWAT duty the sum of $300.00 on the regular paycheck on or before September 1, for the maintenance and replacement of their uniforms and equipment. Employees  receiving  the initial reimbursement will not receive the  maintenance  allowance  in  the same fiscal year.
        4. In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, officers assigned to the Harbor Patrol and permanent members of the Beach Enforcement Team will receive reimbursement of $350.00 for the initial purchase of uniforms and equipment authorized by the Department upon assignment.  City will also pay sworn officers assigned to the Harbor Patrol and permanent members of the Beach Enforcement Team the sum of $150.00 on the regular paycheck on or before September 1, for the maintenance and replacement of their equipment. Employees receiving the initial reimbursement will not receive the maintenance allowance in the same year.
        5. In addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2, officers assigned to the Canine Unit will receive reimbursement of $350.00 for the initial purchase of uniforms and equipment authorized by the  Department upon assignment to the  unit.  Members of the  Canine Unit will also receive an additional $300.00 on the regular paycheck on or before September 1, for the replacement and maintenance of their uniforms.
        6. In addition to the  uniform  and  equipment  allowance  set  out  in B.2, members of the   Bike Patrol will receive  $200.00 reimbursement  for the  initial purchase of uniform and equipment. Officers who have already received  this reimbursement are  not  eligible  for  an  additional  reimbursement.  City  will also pay those sworn officers permanently  assigned  to  the  dedicated  Bike Patrol Unit on September 1, the sum of $150.00 for the maintenance and replacement of said equipment.
        7. Core Instructors assigned to the  Regional  Academy,  as  determined  by  the Chief of Police, will receive an additional initial uniform allowance of
$200.00, and an additional $100.00 on or before September 1, for the replacement and maintenance of their uniforms. This allowance  1s  m addition to the uniform and equipment allowance set out in B.2.
        8. In addition to the  uniform allowance and  equipment  allowance set out in B.2, any sworn officer appointed to the Color Guard Team will be compensated
$800.00 for the initial purchase of the necessary Color Guard uniform items.

        9. In addition to the initial $800.00 uniform allowance, all members of the Color Guard Team in good standing will receive a $200.00 annual uniform maintenance fee in addition to the annual Department Uniform reimbursement each September. However, no Color Guard member will receive the $200.00 uniform maintenance within twelve (12) months of receiving the initial $800.00 uniform compensation.
    C. Motorcycle Officers.

    3. Each sworn officer of the  Department  who 1s  assigned  to  the  motorcycle squad will buy and use the following items:

        a. Motorcycle boots;

        b. Motorcycle breeches;
        c. Gloves - riding;
        d. Gloves -  gauntlet;
        e. Leather jacket;
        f. Safety glasses - clear; and
        g. Safety glasses - sun.
    4. City will issue to each sworn officer assigned to the motorcycle squad:
        a. Department of Transportation approved safety helmet every two (2) years or sooner should there be a defect or damage to the helmet.
        b. City will issue to each motor officer, on an as needed basis, the following equipment:

            1) Protective Gloves;
            2) Protective Goggles; and

            3) Face/Dust mask.

        c. Each officer issued equipment in accordance with paragraphs a and b, will be responsible for that equipment and will surrender such equipment to City upon demand.

    5. On September 1 of each year, City will pay sworn officers of the Department who are assigned to the motorcycle squad $425.00 for the maintenance and replacement of the equipment described in Paragraph 1.
    6. Upon initial assignment to the motorcycle squad, each officer will receive
$750.00 for the initial purchase of equipment described in Paragraph 1. Employees receiving this initial reimbursement  will not receive the  benefits in C.3. in the same fiscal year.

    D. Administration.
    3. Sworn officers reporting for duty  are  expected  to  have  uniforms  and equipment as described in  Sections A, B,  and  C (Section  C applies only to sworn officers  assigned to the  motorcycle  squad).  Failure to have and  use any of these items may result in discipline of the employee.

    4. POA agrees that City has discharged City's obligation pursuant to California Labor Code section 6401 to provide the  safety equipment for police officers as set forth in California Government Code section 50081.1.
    E. The Parties to this MOU agree that if, during the term of this MOU, a change is proposed in the basic uniform,  the  Parties will meet and confer on the  effects of such a change.

ARTICLE 27
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
The following information is provided as a resource summarizing elements of Civil Service Rule X, Leaves of Absence:
    A. Section 3(4). ANNUAL LEAVE - WORKERS' COMPENSATION: Those employees who are absent from duty because of a temporary disability which is defined as industrial under the Workers' Compensation Act, but who are not granted industrial leave may use annual leave credits; provided,  however, that any such employee who receives a temporary disability allowance, as  provided by the Workers' Compensation Law, must reimburse City Auditor and Comptroller in the amount of the authorized compensation, in which case, only that amount of the employee's  accumulated  annual leave credits as when added to said disability allowance will result in a payment of not more than the employee's full salary or wages shall be charged  against  said  accumulated annual leave credits.
    B. Section 4. SICK AND EMERGENCY LEAVES:
        (1) SICK LEAVE INTENT, DEFINITION, PROVISIONS: The intent of this section is to allow continued use of sick leave credits accrued prior to September 4, 1981, for those employees who are unable on account of illness or injury to perform the duties of their positions or who would expose fellow workers or the public to contagious disease and are thereby forced to be absent from employment, and to provide necessary time off from work for medical and dental care, subject to administrative regulations designed to prevent malingering or abuse of these privileges.
            a. SICK LEAVE DEFINITION: Sick leave is defined as the necessary absence from duty of an  employee  on account of illness, injury, or exposure to contagious disease suffered by the employee, or the serious disability of the employee while on a scheduled leave, or absence authorized for medical or dental care.
            b. SICK LEAVE - WORKERS' COMPENSATION: Those employees who are absent from duty because of a temporary disability which is defined as industrial under the Workers Compensation Act, but who are not granted industrial leave may use  sick  leave  credit;  provided,  however,  that  any such employee who receives a temporary disability allowance, as provided under the Workers' Compensation Law, must reimburse City Auditor and Comptroller in the amount of the authorized compensation; in which case,
only that amount of the employee's accumulated sick leave  credits  as when added to said disability allowance will result in a payment of not more than the employee's full salary or wages will be charged against said accumulated sick leave credits.

        (2) EMERGENCY LEAVE:  INTENT,  DEFINITION,  PROVISIONS:  The  intent of this Section is to allow continued use on a limited basis, of sick leave credits accrued prior to September 4, 1981, by an  employee  who  is  confronted  with serious emergency illness, injury, or death in the employee's immediate family.
            a. Emergency leave is defined as the necessary absence from duty of an employee because of emergency illness of a member of the employee's immediate family requiring the attendance of the employee  upon  said member until professional or other attendance can be  obtained,  or  the absence from duty of an employee because of the death of an  immediate family member.
            b. An eligible employee may be granted emergency leave with  pay chargeable to accumulated sick leave credits not to exceed a total of five
(5) workdays for each instance of emergency illness or death in  the employee's immediate family. In the case of illness followed by death, an employee may be granted a maximum of ten (10) consecutive workdays of emergency leave chargeable to sick leave credits.

    C. Section 7. MILITARY LEAVE:
    1. In addition to the leaves of absence provided in this rule, City officers or employees who are also  members  of the  armed services  or  militia  or organized reserves of this State or Nation, will be entitled to the  leaves of absence and the employment rights and privileges provided by the Title 38, United States Code  (USC) Employment  and  Reemployment  Rights of Members of the Uniformed Services, Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) of 1994, and the Military and Veterans' Code of the State of California (unless superseded by United States Code). Military service is defined in Title 38, USC section 4303 (13).
    2. City officers or employees who have had not less than one (1) year of regular City employment immediately prior to the beginning of requested military leave, will receive their regular City compensation during the military leave, not to exceed a period of thirty (30) calendar days in any fiscal year. City and POA will provide flexibility in the  interpretation of Military Compensation for any employee who is on temporary military leave of absence and who has been in the service of the public agency from which the leave is taken for a period of not less than one (1) year immediately prior to the day upon which the leave begins, will be entitled to receive his or her  salary or compensation as such public employee for the first thirty (30) calendar days or one hundred.
seventy four (174) hours of any such absence. Pay for such purposes will not exceed thirty (30) days or one hundred seventy four  (174) hours in  any  one fiscal year. For the  purposes of this section, in  determining  the one year of public agency service, all service of said public employee in the recognized military service will be counted as  public  agency  service.  No  policies governing Military Leave (Personnel  Manual  Index  Code  I-10)  will  be changed to accommodate for this salary flexibility. Military leave hours will accrue on a fiscal year basis  and  will  not  carry forward  into the  next fiscal year.
    3. With reasonable notification to their supervisor no less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the start of their military obligation, unless exceptional circumstances beyond the control of the employee and originating from the employee's military unit, City officers or employees have the option to use military leave, annual leave, compensatory time, or special leave without pay for this leave, or at management's discretion to request that their schedule be adjusted. The Department will take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure that an officer's or employee's schedule is adjusted to facilitate such leave.
    4. Prior to using of military leave, the employee will submit Form CS-14-25A (Request for Leave of Absence) showing Military Leave.
    D. Section 8. COMPULSORY LEAVE: If, in the opinion of the department head, an employee is incapacitated for work on account of illness or injury, such employee may be required, for a period not to exceed two (2) workdays, to absent himself from duty. If said incapacity may reasonably be expected to extend beyond two
(2) workdays, the department head shall require the employee to undergo an examination by a physician designated or approved  by the  Commission.  If the report of the physician shows  the  employee  to be in  an  unfit  condition  to work, the appointing authority shall have the right, subject to Commission approval, to compel such employee to take sufficient leave of absence,  not to exceed  one  (1) year of leave without pay, so as to become fit for the  proper  performance  of assigned duties.
    E. Section 9.  SPECIAL LEAVE WITHOUT PAY: An employee whose work record has been satisfactory and who, for any reason considered good by the appointing authority and the Commission,  desires to secure leave from regular duties, may be granted special leave of absence without pay for a period not exceeding one (1) year. For good cause, such leave may be extended, upon approval of the appointing authority and the Commission. When such leave is granted to enable an employee to take a position in the Unclassified Service, the Commission may, upon request, grant a leave of absence for the period of actual service of the employee in such Unclassified position. An employee asking for special leave without pay, shall submit a request on  prescribed  forms  with  a  transmittal letter, stating the reasons for the request. The Appointing Authority who
endorses such request shall recommend and the Commission shall determine whether the employee shall be entitled to the same position  upon return from such leave or whether the employee's name shall be placed on the eligible list for the class or classes as determined by the Commission. If appropriate, the employee's return shall be subject to passing the prescribed City medical examination.
    F. Section 10. COURT LEAVE: An employee, other than one paid on an hourly basis, who is required by court order to serve as a juror, or as a witness  who is not a party to a court action, shall be granted leave for such purpose upon presentation of proof of the period of his required attendance to the appointing authority and the Personnel Director.   The employee  shall receive full pay for the  time he serves on court duty. Request for such leave shall be made upon leave of absence forms.

    G. Section 11. SPECIAL MEETINGS: Officers and  employees  may  be  granted special permission, without loss of pay,  to  attend  professional  or  technical institutes or conferences,  or  other  meetings  as  may  contribute  to  the effectiveness of their service to City. Such special permission is subject to the approval of the appointing authority or City Council, whichever is applicable. Evidence  of such special permission  to attend said conferences  or  meetings  shall be furnished promptly  by  the  department  head  to  the  Personnel  Director. Officers  and  employees  granted said special permission  shall be considered  to be in duty status.

ARTICLE 28
FIELD TRAINING OFFICER PAY
    A. City agrees to continue a program which will provide extra compensation for employees whose job assignment involves full-time Field Training Officer (FTO) duties (including Sergeants), as defined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, relative to the Police Academy trainees. Participants in this program will receive five percent (5%) of the employee's base rate while designated in a FTO capacity.
    B. The Department agrees to maintain at least one hundred (100) FTOs and the number of FTOs beyond one hundred (100) will be determined at  the discretion of the Chief of Police. In determining the total number of FTO Sergeants, the Department will generally use the  formula of one (1) FTO Sergeant per watch per service area.
ARTICLE 29 CALL-BACK PAY
    A. An employee  who has  been released from  work and  has  left the  workplace   will, if called back to duty from home or any other non-work location, be paid for the
reasonable estimate of the time required to travel from and to his  or  her residence and the workplace and for the time actually worked. The total time of call-back pay, including travel time, will not be less than four (4) hours.

    B. This provision does not apply to instances when an  employee is already present at the workplace and is required by a supervisor to start work early  or  to continue work following the end of shift. This provision also does not apply to a meeting scheduled after the employee's shift, and which is contiguous with the shift.  In those instances, the employee will receive compensation only for the time actually worked or spent in the meeting after his or her shift.

ARTICLE 30 COURT PAY
Employees eligible for premium overtime that are required, as a result of their employment responsibilities, to make court appearances during otherwise off-duty hours, will be treated as follows:
    A. The employee will receive compensation at premium overtime of his or her regular base rate for all time actually spent in court (minimum of four (4) hours), excluding court recess time.

    B. If an employee is scheduled to appear in court up to two (2) hours prior to the beginning of his or her shift, the employee's schedule may be adjusted to correspond with the court appearance. The intent of this change is to align the beginning of the shift with court appearances  and minimize the incidence  of court pay for hours not actually spent on court duty.  If an  employee  is ordered by his or her immediate supervisor, duty lieutenant or Communications to work beyond the regular number of hours per day on the adjusted shift, the four-hour
(4) minimum applies, plus relevant overtime for the shift extension. The four­ hour (4) minimum does not apply in situations in which an employee  was directed to work beyond the adjusted shift as a result of a self-initiated action,
i.e. a vehicle or person stopped and detained, an arrest, etc.
    C. Eligibility restrictions described in Section B also applies to the minimum requirements described in Section A above.
    D. If the employee makes a court appearance  during the morning session and  at least part of the afternoon session, after he or she has just completed working a night shift, and if the employee is scheduled to work the next succeeding night
shift, the employee will have the option of receiving premium overtime for the actual court appearance  time or having the succeeding scheduled night shift off as compensatory time. If an employee is scheduled off on his or her next shift following a court appearance, he or she may not exercise the second option.
    E. Compensatory overtime will begin at the time indicated on the subpoena unless the officer is otherwise notified by a superior.




    A. Court Stand-By.
ARTICLE 31
STAND-BY COMPENSATION

When an employee is under subpoena to appear in court during his or her non­ duty hours, the  employee will go to the court and stand by until called by the court and will receive pay at a premium rate of one and one-half times the basic rate for stand-by time, or, with the concurrence of  the  subpoenaing  party, remain standing by at another location where he or she may be reached by the court by telephone. If an employee stands by at another location, no pay will be received for such stand-by time. No employee will be required to stand-by without compensation without his or her consent.
    B. Non-Court Stand-by.
In order to ensure operational effectiveness, the Department may require or request its employees to be available to return to work during the off-duty hours. When this condition occurs, the employee is deemed to be on stand-by. When employees are on stand-by, they must be available by telephone or other electronic communication device and able to return to duty within one (1) hour of receiving a request to do so.  The determination for the  need to place an officer on stand-by-time is at the sole discretion of the Department.
    C. Employees who are required or agree to be on stand-by will be compensated as follows:
        1. For every three hundred (300) hours of stand-by time accrued, employees will be awarded one (1) day of discretionary leave time.
        2. Employees may accrue up to ten (10) days of discretionary leave per fiscal year (July 1 - June 30).
        3. All discretionary  days accrued  must be taken within six (6) months of the date they were approved. The employee's commanding officer can extend the six (6) month deadline at his or her discretion.
        4. If an employee has not already accrued the maximum ten (10) discretionary days by the end of the fiscal year, any remaining discretionary hours, up to three-hundred (300), may be carried forward into the next fiscal year.
        5. Employees who are  required or agree to be on stand-by on their scheduled day off will accrue up to twenty-four (24) hours on stand-by time.
        6. Employees who are required or agree to be on stand-by  during  their scheduled workday may accrue up to fourteen (14) hours of stand-by time during the time they are not working.

ARTICLE 32 OVERTIME
It  is  agreed that premium compensation  at  the  rate of one and  one-half  (1.5) times the base rate will be paid to employees in the classifications of Police Recruit, Police Officer I,  Police Officer II,  Police Officer III, Police Agent, Police Detective,  and Police Sergeant, under the following conditions:
    A. When an employee is called back to work from a non-duty status, he or she will receive premium pay for all such call-back time worked, with a four (4) hour minimum of compensation in each such instance, notwithstanding the usual starting time of the  work shift.
        1. An employee's "work shift" refers to the hours of work of the  employee's normally scheduled  work day. The work shift may be  permanently  adjusted if the employee is given at least seventy-two (72) hours notice of the change. If seventy-two (72) hours notice of the change is given, paying premium pay as described above is  not required,  provided that the employee  does not work a total number of hours greater than his or her normally scheduled hours. An employee's days off cannot be changed solely to avoid paying overtime. Department Management may, by providing at least  five  (5)  calendar  days notice to an affected employee, change an  employee's  permanent  days  off. When unforeseen special events or emergencies arise necessitating that an employee  be required to work on his or her  scheduled  days off,  he or she  will be paid overtime, or, at his or her election, be assigned other days off as a substitution. As a  general policy,  officers  will not be required  to work  more than seven (7) consecutive  days  unless  it  is  an  emergency.  "Special  Events" or "Emergencies" will be defined as unforeseen crime problems, natural or man-made disasters, special events of which the Department had little or no knowledge, e.g., presidential visits, and events  requiring  unusually  large numbers of personnel.
        2. Notwithstanding the terms of the FLSA, an employee's hours and/or days off may be changed on a temporary basis with or without seventy-two (72) hours or five (5) calendar days notice, when the employee voluntarily waives those
requirements. "Voluntary" is defined as acting freely without any coercion, stated, or implied. (Department Management may request that the employee sign a form denoting such schedule alternations).
        3. The terms "permanent" or "permanently'' means a change no more than once within the span of a shift.
    B. When an employee is required under subpoena to appear in court during non­ duty hours, he or she will receive premium  pay for court time with a four (4) hour minimum of compensation in each such instance. Employees will not receive a second four (4) hour minimum of premium pay for subpoenas requiring appearances within four (4) hours of a first subpoena appearance time (e.g., a 10:30 a.m. subpoena following an 8:15 a.m. subpoena on the same date). Only actual time above the first four (4) hour minimum will be compensated with premium pay in such cases. However, pursuant to Article 30.B, an employee's schedule may be adjusted to correspond to a court appearance, eliminating the need for overtime pay.  When an employee is directed to telephone a specific court or agency at a designated time during non-duty hours for the purpose of a telephonic hearing, and he or she does not have to place the call from  a designated location, he or she will receive premium pay for such time with a thirty (30) minute minimum of compensation for each instance.
    C. Eligibility restrictions described in Article 29.B, will also apply to the minimum requirements described in above sections 1 and 2.
    D. When an employee's shift is extended beyond its normal ending time, he or she will receive premium pay for the actual time worked beyond the employee's regular shift hours.
    E. If an employee is scheduled to work or directed by the Department to work on a fixed City holiday, he or she  will receive  pay at  time and one half for the actual time worked on the holiday and will also receive ten (10) hours of straight time pay for the holiday. An employee that observes the City holiday will receive straight time pay equal to his or her normal assigned shift. If they are called back to work on that City holiday they will receive time and one half pay for time worked with a four (4) hour minimum.
    F. For all overtime earned, all employees of the bargaining unit will receive either compensatory time off or pay, at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may, at any time, determine that all overtime will be pay only. However, all previously accrued compensatory time must be honored under the terms of this MOU. Employees will not receive compensatory time off where the Department is reimbursed by another governmental agency for overtime worked by employees.
    G. The Parties agree that overtime worked may be paid for by City as compensatory time off at the rate of time and one half for each hour worked. Compensatory

time earned and accrued through overtime  work will be banked in a leave bank of up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours. This leave bank will carry over to the next fiscal year, but will not exceed eighty (80) hours total.
    H. Use of Compensatory Time.
The following terms will control compensatory time off:

        1. Compensatory time off request will  be  honored  if  the  request  for compensatory  time off is  made  seven (7) calendar  days or  more  prior to the day requested for leave.
        2. Requests for use of compensatory time off to be used the day before the following Holidays: New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, and Christmas Day will be honored if the request is made thirty (30) calendar days or more prior to the day requested for leave.

        3. The Parties agree to meet when circumstance arise  that  create  safety concerns regarding staffing levels resulting from compensatory time off requests during special events or circumstances, and to resolve the safety concern by an appropriate agreement.
    I. Motor Unit and Canine Unit.
City agrees to provide employees assigned to the Canine Unit three point five (3.5) additional hours of compensation each forty hour (40) work week at premium rate overtime for time spent cleaning, preparing, and maintaining their equipment. City agrees that employees assigned to the Motors Unit will be released from work for two (2) hours during their scheduled shift each week for cleaning, preparing, and maintaining their equipment. This time  will  be scheduled on a day that is conducive to the employee's schedule. The Parties agree that this is a reasonable amount of time for such activities. If an employee, due to extraordinary circumstances, spends  more  than the agreed  to time on these activities, an employee assigned to the Canine Unit may request additional overtime and an employee assigned to the Motor Unit may request to be released for additional time during their scheduled shift. This must be pre-approved. Captains and Lieutenants are ineligible to receive the  Motor  Unit and Canine Unit pays described above.

ARTICLE 33 WORK SCHEDULES
Effective July 1, 2003, the 4/10 plan will be applied to all sworn positions below the rank of Captain. The 4/10 plan includes a thirty-minute (30) paid lunch break.
    A. All officers on a 4/10 work schedule will report to work at the scheduled start of their assigned shift. Officers who are scheduled to work at the  hour daylight savings time either begins or ends will not have their hours adjusted to avoid working overtime. Officers will report at their scheduled time and work a regular, full ten-hour (10) shift.
    B. All officers may receive thirty (30) minutes during their assigned shift as a meal break during which time they may report as Code 7. This period is unpaid.
    C. An officer's conduct while on Code 7 for a meal break 1s governed  by Department Instruction 6.32.

    D. During this thirty-minute (30) break, officers will be available to respond to emergency calls.
    E. If an officer's break is interrupted by an emergency call, the break will be resumed after the call is completed.
    F. If an officer is unable to take a total of thirty (30) minutes for a meal break during his or her assigned shift, the officer will be paid  premium  rate overtime for this thirty (30) minute period. This request for overtime will be submitted through the normal procedures.

ARTICLE 34 STARTING SALARY
The Parties incorporate Personnel Manual Index Code H-9, Starting Salary Upon Appointment, in this MOU, except that employees promoted from the class of Police Officer I to Police Officer II will receive at least the base salary of "C" step of the Police Officer II class.

ARTICLE 35
POA REPRESENTATION
Department Management will support a request to the Civil Service Commission for a Leave of Absence Without Pay for two (2) POA members for the same period of time, unless there is compelling reason to not support a "job to be saved" type leave. In the latter case, City will meet and confer with POA in advance of any objection to the leave without pay request.
ARTICLE 36
PAYROLL ELECTRONIC DEPOSIT
All employees will be required to provide authorization to City Comptroller to electronically deposit their paychecks to a financial institution of their choice (subject to electronic compatibility). Employees will not be required to change financial institutions if their financial institution is not compatible with the Automated Clearing House (ACH) transfer.

ARTICLE 37 EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATION
    A. An employee may request a representative, not to exceed one (1) City employee and one non-City employee, to be present: (1) at any investigatory or fact-finding meeting which may result in suspension, discharge, demotion, or transfer for purposes of punishment, except in cases requiring immediate removal or suspension as defined in Civil Service Rule XI, sections 4 and 6, and Personnel Manual Index Code L-2 II.(C); (2) an employee may also request representation during  the  required  discussion  of  any	document, including a Supplemental Performance Report or written reprimand, which is to be made part of the employee's permanent record and which may be used as a basis for subsequent discipline with the following provisions:
        1. An employee  cannot select a "City employee  representative" who is subject to the same investigation or fact-finding, including  any  employee  who  is  a witness to the event which is the subject of the investigation or fact-finding.
        2. An employee may not select an  employee  who is  in  the  employee's  direct chain of command as his or her "City employee representative."
    B. In all other instances, Department Management has the right to counsel employees as it deems appropriate without employee representation  being present.
    C. This Article is to be interpreted consistent with the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights (California Government Code sections 3300, et seq.) (POBOR).

    D. An officer subject to interrogation by a single Departmental representative may have a sole representative. If the interrogation is conducted by more than one
(1) Departmental representative, an  officer  may be represented  as provided for in Paragraph A.

ARTICLE 38
DEPARTMENTAL PROCEDURES - ADVANCE NOTICE
The Department may, in its discretion issue Departmental Procedures in writing which pertain to matters not within the scope of  representation. In  order  to promote communications between the Department and  POA,  the  Department agrees to direct a copy of proposed  written Departmental Procedures  to POA prior to official publication of the Procedures. Nothing in this Article is intended to require or obligate, directly or indirectly, the Department to meet and confer on any subject contained as proposed Departmental Procedures which is not within the scope of representation. The purpose of this Article is to enable POA to review any proposed written Departmental Procedure in advance of publication and provide comments as may be appropriate. Nothing in this Article limits  or  otherwise restricts the Department from immediately publishing departmental procedures which in the determination of the Department are of an emergency nature.




    A. Purpose.
ARTICLE 39 TUITION REFUND PLAN

        1. To encourage and financially assist employees to continue their education so they may improve their job knowledge, skills, and  capabilities  in  their present job and to prepare for advancement within City employment.

        2. To assist City, through employee development, in achieving maximum use of human resources in attaining Departmental objectives including Equal Opportunity goals.
    B. Eligibility Rules.
        1. Eligible employees  will be reimbursed one hundred  percent (100%) of tuition and fees for textbooks and supplies under certain conditions, up to a limit of
$1,000.00 per fiscal year. Reimbursement will be made for professional and technical courses offered by accredited colleges, universities, business, trade or correspondence schools, as part of an educational plan which has been approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.

            a. Taxation of reimbursements will be made based on IRS regulations.
            b. City	Comptroller	will	be	responsible	for	determining	which reimbursements are taxable income in accordance with IRS regulations.
        2. Tuition Reimbursement is an employee benefit, whereas  attendance  at training is available at Department Management's discretion. Tuition Reimbursement will not be available for related employee travel expenses.
Tuition Reimbursement course attendance must occur on the employee's personal time, not on City time. Travel costs are potentially reimbursable when related to attendance at  training. Training  may be attended on City time.

        3. One day seminars are considered training and are ineligible for Tuition Reimbursement. A semester course can be paid for by Tuition Reimbursement.

        4. Conditions under which reimbursement may be approved are as follows:

            a. The course work must relate to the applicant's present position or must be beneficial to the employee's City related professional development,  or must enhance career advancement potential within City, as follows:
                1) An improvement in skills or knowledge required by the present position;

                2) Preparing the employee for significant technological changes occurring in his or her City related career field;
                3) Preparing the employee for changes in duties due to the  different  use of a position or class;
                4) Preparing the employee  for the  assumption  of new and  different  duties as a result of a recent promotional appointment;

                5) Preparing the employee for promotional opportunities within the employee's present career series with City, supported by a logical educational plan of accomplishment approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designee; or
                6) Preparing the employee for career-enhancing promotional opportunities or transfer opportunities into a different City  career series.
            b. An educational plan must be approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designee prior to course enrollment. This plan must include:
                1) Intended degree to be achieved or continuing professional education requirements to be satisfied;
                2) Major area of study;

                3) Core courses and number of electives required by the educational institution; or
                4) Additional information as required by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
            c. Reimbursement will be made for all core courses and for electives taken to fulfill degree requirements. Core courses should take priority, and the majority of them should be completed prior to enrolling in elective courses.

            d. Reimbursement will be made for courses taken to satisfy professional continuing education certificate and  licensing  requirements. These courses must directly relate to the employee's City career.
            e. Individual semester classes directly related to the employee's current position with City are potentially reimbursable.

            f. Requests for reimbursements must  be  approved by the  Chief  of Police  or his or her designee before enrollment in the Course.
            g. Reimbursement will be made for tuition fees and/or  required  textbooks and a reasonable amount of supplies (as determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee) verified by receipts upon completion of the course with a grade of at least "C," "Satisfactory," "Pass" (for Pass/Fail courses), or the equivalent. Reimbursement will be made within 90 days after all forms are properly completed and submitted.
            h. The employee must have completed six (6) months of City service in a budgeted City position prior to starting the course. Tuition Reimbursement is not available for hourly employees.
1.     The minimum amount of tuition reimbursement  which will be approved for any employee is $5.00 per course.
J. The employee must not be receiving funds for the same course from any other source, such as scholarships, with the exception of  Veteran's benefits.
k. Tuition fees for City sponsored courses for which academic credit  is granted by an accredited college or university will be reimbursable under this program, subject to the limits described above.
    C. Requests and Reimbursement - Procedure.
        1. An employee meeting the eligibility rules fills out the "Tuition Reimbursement Request Form" or CM-1578 or both, as required, "Request for Approval of Tuition Reimbursement," in four copies, prior to enrollment  in the class. The form is available from In-Service Training Section. A central supply is maintained in City Operations Building - Store No.  4. The employee submits the original CM-1578, (Tuition Reimbursement Request
Form), and the Department Educational Plan for approval to In-Service Training prior to the class start date.
        2. The completed form  is  presented  to the  employee's  Chief  of Police or his or her designee.
        3. The In-Service Training Unit will manage the Educational Plan and submit a complete package to Financial Management for appropriate review, approval and submission to the Auditor for reimbursement payment. Two (2) copies of the completed package are retained at In-Service Training. The program manager (Administrative Aide II) keeps one copy; the  other copy is retained in the employee's training file.
        4. Upon completing the course,  the  employee  will  furnish  the  In-Service Training Section with the original receipts of payments made, and proof of passing grades or evidence of satisfactory completion.
    D. Exceptions.

Department Management and POA agree to form a standing committee comprised of two (2) POA representatives and two (2) Department Management representatives to meet approximately twice yearly for the purpose of reviewing prospective exceptions and establishing an initial list of Tuition Reimbursement exceptions. Exceptions must receive prospective approval. Disagreements will be referred to the Human Resources Director and POA for discussion.

ARTICLE 40 FLIGHT PAY
    A. Those members of the Department who are authorized to  fly the Department's aircraft and who are additionally designated  as  a "Primary Pilot" will receive approximately eleven and one-half percent (11.5%) of employee's base pay as special assignment pay. During the  term of this MOU, there will be no less than two (2) primary pilots. Effective the  first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2019, Primary Pilot's special assignment pay shall increase to fifteen percent  (15%)  of  employee's base pay.
    B. Effective the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2016, the City will provide up to $5,000 tuition reimbursement for Tactical Flight Officer's (TFOs) who are actively working towards their pilot's license as a prerequisite to become an Airborne Law Enforcement ("ABLE") Pilot. This tuition reimbursement is subject to the conditions set forth in Administrative Regulations 70.30. This tuition reimbursement is in addition to any tuition reimbursement available under Article 39 of this MOU. Total tuition reimbursement
under these two Articles is $6,000 per fiscal year. under Article 39. There is no guarantee that the Department will subsequently hire a TFO who is pursuing a pilot's license as an ABLE Pilot.
    C. Effective the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2019, TFOs will receive specialty pay equal to five percent (5%) of employee's base pay.

    D. Effective the first full pay period in Fiscal Year 2019, Sergeants assigned to the unit who are receiving neither TFO specialty pay nor Primary Pilots pay will receive 5% Administrative Assignment Pay.
    E. Any officer relieving a primary pilot will also receive flight pay for the period served in that capacity.
    F. Air Support Trainers will receive approximately three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee's base pay.
    G. The cost of the required FAA pilot physical will be reimbursed by City.

ARTICLE 41
PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS PROCEDURAL BILL OF RIGHTS (POBOR) PROCEDURES

    A. POBOR.
        1. The Parties hereto recognize that all members of the Police Unit and Police Management Unit are covered by the prov1s10ns and decisional interpretations of the POBOR.
        2. Officers may, with the approval of POA Board of Directors, bring an action in Superior Court without exhausting the administrative remedies described in this Article, in those instances where it is alleged that a specific violation of the POBOR has occurred and it is alleged that the remedies contained in this Article are inadequate.
    B. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following definitions apply:
        1. "Punitive action" means those actions which may directly lead to dismissal, demotion, suspension, reduction in salary, written reprimand, written warning, transfer for purposes of punishment, or an evaluation in which the employee is not meeting performance standards.

        2. "Interrogation" means any inquiry concerning the actions or conduct of an officer which may lead to punitive action or criminal allegation.
        3. "Investigation" means the process of conducting an inquiry or inquiries into the actions or conduct of an officer or officers from the moment it is reasonably apparent that the inquiry or inquiries may lead to punitive  action or criminal allegations directed toward an officer or officers.
    C. Civil Service Appeals.
        1. Officers may, in addition to other rights to administrative appeals  and hearings set out in this MOU, appeal any punitive action which is covered by provisions of City Civil Service Rules to the Civil Service Commission in accordance with those rules.
        2. Where a punitive transfer action has taken place in conjunction with  a disciplinary  action over which the  Civil Service Commission has  jurisdiction, the Parties to  this  MOU  agree  that  the  Commission  may  rule  on  the propriety  of the   matter  before  it  and  that  the Department  will be bound on the matter of the punitive transfer by the findings of the Civil Service Commission.
    D. Investigations.

        1. Any officer or officers under investigation will receive at least three (3) working days notice prior to an interrogation except where a delay  will hamper the  gathering of evidence as determined  by an Assistant Chief.  At the time an officer is advised that an interrogation is planned, the officer will be advised of the  subject of the  interrogation and told that he or she has a right to obtain representation.

        2. The actual scheduling of the interrogation is subject to the reasonable accommodation of the schedules of the subject officer and his or her representative.

        3. Investigations of shooting incidents involving officers and any incident involving the actions or conduct of an officer or officers where personnel from the Internal Affairs Unit are called to the scene of the  incident  will be reported to POA immediately. POA will provide a telephone number to the Department and it is the responsibility of the duty lieutenant to telephone POA's number and report the general nature of the incident.
        4. Officers who are removed from the normal duties of the job during the pendency of an investigation will not be removed for longer than thirty (30) calendar days except where the business necessities of  the Department require the removal from duties to extend beyond thirty (30) days. If the investigation requires an extension, the involved officer has the right to a hearing before an Assistant Chief concerning the business necessities alleged and  will have the opportunity to argue and present evidence to contradict those business necessities. This hearing is an informal opportunity for the
officer to present to the Chief of Police or his or her designee of not less than the rank of Assistant Chief regarding why the extension should not  be granted. This is not to be confused with the evidentiary hearing afforded officers pursuant to the POBOR for punitive action.
    E. Intra-Department Hearings.
        1. Scope.  The  intra-departmental  hearing  procedures	described in this MOU are available to officers as follows:

            a. Dismissal;
            b. Suspension;
            c. Demotion - in rank or classification;
            d. Reduction in compensation (as defined in Personnel Manual Index Code L-2); does not include loss of overtime due to transfer or loss of a take­ home car due to assignment);
            e. Written reprimand;
            f. Written warning;

            g. Performance evaluation m which the employee 1s not meeting performance standards; or
            h. Punitive Transfers.
            i. Officers entitled to appeal any action to the Civil Service Commission will retain that right notwithstanding the use of intra-departmental appeal procedures and  may elect either or both procedures without prejudice to the other.
            j. The intra-department hearing procedures are  available  only to officers who have permanent status with City. For probationary officers,  see Article 41.I below.
        2. Procedure. Hearings regarding punitive actions will be conducted as follows:
            a. The hearing officer will be the  Chief of Police or his or her designee of not less than the rank of Assistant Chief, except  that  for  hearings  regarding notes of counseling and written warnings not brought by a Police Captain, a Police Captain may  be  the  designated  hearing  officer.  The  hearing officer cannot be an  individual who had  a  role in the  original decision to take punitive actions.
            b. Each officer  requesting to appeal a matter  has ten (10) working days to file an appeal with the office of the Chief of Police.
            c. The appeal hearing will be recorded in  a manner that permits a transcript to be made. All parties will have access to the original recordation, a duplicate copy and any transcript.

            d. The officer  has  the  right  to  present  evidence,  cross-examine  witnesses, and require the attendance of any witnesses who are city employees.

            e. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will render a written decision which states the facts found to be true and the decision  of  the hearing officer based upon those facts.
            f. Officers who have reached permanent status may appeal a decision of the hearing officer  in  matters set out in  section E.1.d  and  E.1.e of this Article, to the Human Resources Department within  ten  (10)  working  days  of receipt of the decision. Such appeal will consist solely of a review of the written record and/or audio tapes developed at prior steps of the  appeal. Mayor or his or her designee, the Human Resources Director, will issue findings within thirty (30) working days of receipt of the  full and  entire appeal package.
        3. Denial of Promotion on Grounds Other Than Merit.
            a. General Guidelines.

                1) In every promotional process there are more qualified candidates than there are available positions for promotion. This  Article  is  not intended to address the inevitable non-promotion of an otherwise qualified candidate for which there is no right of appeal under this Article.
                2) During the promotional process, the Chief of Police will receive a list of certified candidates who are eligible for promotion from City Personnel Department. All candidates on the certified list are considered equally qualified for purposes of promotion. The Chief of Police has complete discretion  to select anyone from  the  certified  list.  It is acknowledged that the entire promotional process is merit based.

                3) Any officer denied promotion on grounds other than merit may appeal the denial through the process set out in this MOU. However, the fact that an otherwise qualified candidate whose name appeared on the certified list was not selected is not, in and of itself,  a ground for appeal. Officers not on the certified list have no standing to appeal under the Article.
    F. Prima Facie Case.
Prior to any appeal being heard, a written appeal will set forth a prima facie case stating the grounds the appellant was given as the reason for non-selection
denied a promotion on grounds other than merit. The written appeal must be submitted to the Chief of Police's office within twenty (20) working days of the alleged violation. In order to meet the threshold prima facie showing for an appeal hearing, the appellant must make specific factual assertions of conduct, other than matters over which the Appointing Authority  has  discretion  in making selections based on merit, which if true, would violate appellant's protected rights.   The initial determination  of whether a prima facie case has been sufficiently stated will be determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee not lower than the rank of Assistant Chief  with a written  decision issued within twenty (20) working days from submission of  the appeal. However, a decision denying an appeal hearing based on an insufficient prima facie case may be appealed to the Human Resources Department.   The appeal will be submitted to the Human Resources Department in writing within ten
(10) working days of receipt of the denial.

    G. Denial of Promotion Hearing.
        1. The Department  will maintain a record of the   hearing and provide  appellant with a copy of any written or audio  recording.  The  cost  of  a  court  reporter will be at the expense of the party requesting the reporter.
        2. The hearing is limited in scope to the specific factual assertions made in the appellant's written prima facie showing. The appellant has the right to call and examine witnesses and present evidence. Prior to the hearing, the appellant will provide the hearing officer with a proposed witness list. The hearing officer will preside over the hearing and has authority to rule on the appropriateness and relevance of witnesses to be called, the admissibility of evidence and all other procedural matters.
        3. The hearing will be heard by the Human Resources Department.
        4. The hearing officer will issue findings of fact and a decision within thirty (30) days of the hearing to deny the appeal or to grant an appropriate and lawful remedy.

    H. Other Negative Material.

        1. Any officer who has material negative to his or her employment relationship or a performance evaluation containing negative comments (other than a Supplemental Performance Report) placed in his or her personnel file may appeal the placement of the adverse material to a ranking officer of not less than the rank of Captain.
        2. Personnel Files. Any employee who has any material adverse to his or her employment relationship placed in a personnel file will be allowed to file a complete written response to the material within thirty (30) calendar days of being notified of its placement in the file. The Department will notify an
individual of the placement of the material in the file by certified mail within thirty  (30)  calendar  days of its  placement.  If the  Department  fails to notify, the  material  will  be considered  void  and  removed from  the  personnel file. The  rights to protection of the  personnel file established  in  this MOU survive the termination of the employee should such material be placed into the file without the knowledge of the employee or after his or her termination.
        3. For the purposes of this section and this Article, "Personnel file" will mean any file or repository of material kept for the purpose of making employment related decisions concerning an officer.
    I. Separation of Probationary Employees.

        1. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after the Department separates a probationary employee, unless extended by mutual agreement, the Department will provide one informal and non-evidentiary post-separation hearing, to be conducted by an Assistant Chief or his or her designee. A reasonable number  of witnesses may be presented. The Department  will serve the  decision within seven (7) calendar  days.  There is no appeal from the  Department's decision at  this hearing, and the Department's decision is not subject to the Grievance Procedure.
        2. Upon separation of a probationary officer who is terminated for less than satisfactory performance or failure to meet employment standards, City will release to any person or entity seeking information only the name of the officer, the dates of employment, classification and "failed probation." The only exception will be proper process of the court and a waiver signed by the affected employee. Such separation will not be considered disciplinary in nature.
    J. Other Policies, Practices and Procedures.
        1. During the term of this MOU, no policies, practices or procedures of City or the Department which affect wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of employment and which specifically affect investigations, or the procedures for conducting appeals and hearings will be changed in any way without the mutual agreement of the Parties.
        2. During the term of this MOU, City agrees not to implement or adopt any changes in policy or procedure which adversely affects or diminishes the procedural or substantive rights of officers contained in this Article, the Personnel Manual, the San Diego Charter (Charter) of City, any applicable state or federal law, or the Constitutions of the State of California or the United States except by mutual agreement of the Parties.

    K. Miscellaneous Provisions.
        1. Conformity with POBOR. All prov1s10ns of this Article are to be read to expand or complement rights which officers enjoy under the POBOR. The Parties to this MOU do not intend to limit or reduce those statutory rights in any way.

        2. Formal reprimands without further penalty more than two (2) years old, and those with additional penalty more than five (5) years old, will not be considered for purposes of promotion, transfer, special assignments and disciplinary actions except as to disciplinary actions, when the reprimands show  patterns  of  specific  similar  police  misconduct	as defined in the Departmental  Rules  and  Regulations  and  Department  Instructions.	All officers will have the right to review their Departmental and Divisional Personnel Jackets and identify all the documents.	Upon concurrence of the commanding officer that such documents have been appropriately identified, they will be placed in an envelope, sealed and initialed by the officer. The envelope will be placed in the officer's Department personnel file and will be opened only in the event the officer is subject to discipline in the future.
        3. Upon the adoption of this Article, the appropriate provisions of policies, practices, and procedures of City and Department will be  amended  to conform with this MOU. If City or Department fail to make appropriate amendments to policies, practices, or procedures or if the  policies, practices, or procedures conflict with this Article, this Article will prevail.

ARTICLE 42 COPIES OF THE MOU
POA may obtain copies of this MOU from City by reimbursing City for their cost. This MOU will be posted on City's website in a location easily accessible to all POA Members.
City agrees to send electronic link to the POA MOU to the Police Department and the Department will email the link out to all Officers.

ARTICLE 43 SENIORITY
    A. Seniority. Seniority will be computed according to the length of last continuous service in the class of the class, or of an equal or higher ranking class.  Ties will be broken by first considering the length of total City service, and then at the discretion of the Appointing Authority.
    B. Job Rights. Subject to the provisions of Rules VI and IX, a permanent employee whose layoff is imminent will have the right of transfer to any vacant position in the  same class or subdivision  thereof  in any other department. If there is no such vacancy, said employee will have the right of competition for retention in equal and the next successively lower classes in which he or she has served satisfactorily. The Parties acknowledge that there are no "subdivision" classifications in this bargaining unit.

ARTICLE 44 RETIREMENT
The following Paragraphs A and C are included in this MOU for historical purposes only and have no force and effect during the term of this MOU.
    A. Federal law mandates that all employees be covered by a  qualified retirement plan or by Social Security effective July 1, 1991.  This impacts the classification of Police Recruit as Police Recruits do not participate in any retirement system while in the Academy. Due to this mandate, it is agreed for the classification of Police Recruit that participation in a version of the Supplemental  Pension Savings Plan is mandatory until becoming sworn and being enrolled in City Retirement System.
    B. Effective July 1, 2013, Police Recruits participate in the SPSP-H Plan, as amended by the City Council by Ordinance 0-20275, adopted July 19, 2013, until they are sworn officers and become eligible for the defined benefit plan.

    C. 1981 Pension Plan: Effective July 1, 1991, for the  purpose of benefit calculation only, the 1981 Plan service will  be  made  equivalent  to  San  Diego  City Employees' Retirement System (SDCERS) service.
    D. Internal Revenue Code section 414(h)(2).
Beginning July 1, 1993, City agrees to implement Internal Revenue Code section 414(h)(2) for all members in the unit, allowing employee contributions to the Retirement System to be made pre-tax, contingent upon "safe harbor" limitations not being exceeded.
    E. 1997 Benefit Changes.
The following paragraph E.1. is provided solely for historical purposes and  has no effect. City and POA, having met and conferred, have agreed to benefit improvements to San Diego City Employees Retirement System (SDCERS). The City Council has approved these changes by adoption of Ordinance No. 0-18383 Adopted on February 25, 1997, and Ordinance No. 0-18392 on March 31, 1997; subsequently the improvements were approved by a majority vote of System Members in April 1997. Those changes include the following:
        1. Effective August 1, 1997, a Retiree Health Benefit is established for eligible retirees. A Health Eligible Retiree is any retired Member who: (1) was on the active payroll of City on or after October 5, 1980; (2) retired on or after October 6, 1980 but before April 1, 2012, and (3) is eligible for and is receiving a retirement allowance from the Retirement System.
            a. Health Eligible Retirees may choose to participate in a City-sponsored health insurance plan or any other health insurance  plan of their choice. The Retirement System will pay or reimburse the applicable Medicare­ eligible or non-Medicare eligible retiree-only premium up to but not to exceed the cost of the retiree-only premium for the highest cost HMO plan which is also a City sponsored health insurance plan made available to Health Eligible Retirees.
            b. Additionally, the Retirement System will reimburse the Part B Supplemental Medical Expense Premium for those Health  Eligible Retirees enrolled in Medicare.

            c. City agrees that it will not diminish the benefits contained in its current retiree HMO plans without mutual agreement with the exclusive bargaining representatives; nor convert to a blended premium for active employees and retirees without mutual agreement with the exclusive bargaining representatives.
        2. The Disability Income Offset prov1s10n is eliminated. There will be no reduction of retirement benefits if the retiree has other income.
        3. A five-year purchase of service credit provision is established effective January 1, 1997 for employees hired before July 1, 2005. Under  this provision, the eligible Member may purchase up to five years of service credit by paying both employee and employer contributions in an amount and manner determined by the San Diego City Employees' Retirement System Board to make the System whole for such time. In addition, eligible Members retiring on or after January 1, 1997, may purchase probationary periods, military and veterans code leaves, waiting periods for the 1981 Pension Plan, actual time worked hourly or part time, special leaves without pay occurring prior to January 1, 1997, the difference in  time between part time  and full time prior to January 1, 1997, long term disability, vocational rehabilitation maintenance (VRMA) and temporary total disability (TTD), FMLA periods, special leaves of absence with job to be saved periods and any preceding reinstatement by the Civil Service Commission following a termination appeal.
        4. A Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP) is  established effective April 1, 1997. DROP provides an alternative form of benefit accrual while allowing a Member to continue working for City. During the DROP period, a  DROP Member retains all rights, privileges and benefits of being an active City
employee, except as specifically modified in the DROP Plan (SDMC Chapter 2, Article 4, Division 14), and is subject to the same terms and conditions of employment including disciplinary actions up to and including termination. The Member continues to be eligible for the active employee Flex Benefits Program for the classification and is not eligible for "retiree" health benefits until the Member terminates City employment. Under DROP, a monthly service retirement allowance along with any COLA increases, Supplemental Benefit checks and any adjustments to such payments applicable to retirements effective on the date the Member entered the DROP are  credited to the member's DROP Account in the SDCERS Trust Fund. These SDCERS benefits are calculated as if the Member were retiring on  the  date  the Member enters the DROP. The Member's contributions to the Retirement System cease. The Member and City each contribute 3.05% of the Member's salary each pay period that the Member participates in the DROP. The Member's contribution is made on a pre-tax basis pursuant to  Internal Revenue Code section 414(h)(2). These amounts are credited to the Member's DROP Account in the SDCERS Trust Account, and are distributed to the DROP participant upon termination of employment. No withdrawals may be made from the DROP Account until the Member terminates City employment. Interest is credited to the Member's DROP account at a rate determined by the SDCERS Board. The Member is one hundred percent (100%) vested in his or her DROP Account from its inception.
A DROP participant who becomes disabled may apply for conversion of their deferred retirement allowance to a disability  retirement allowance calculated at the date of entry into the DROP, and the employee will retain all of the DROP and matching contributions. A Member who participates in DROP irrevocably designates a specific consecutive period of months for participation, not to exceed 60 months. The Member must terminate City service at the end of the designated period.
At the completion of the DROP period, and after the Member terminates City employment, the DROP account will be distributed as a lump sum, or in any other manner permitted by the IRS as soon as those options are developed by the Retirement Administration.

        5. For retirements effective on or after January 1, 1997, the 50% continuance is available to the spouse to whom the Member was married on the date of retirement. The requirement that the member be  married  to  his  or  her spouse at least one year prior to retirement for the spouse to receive the 50% continuance is eliminated.

    F. A retirement allowance cap of ninety 90% of Final Compensation (high one year salary) is established for eligible Police Safety Members, except as provided in paragraph I below.
    G. 2000 Retirement Benefit Changes.
City and POA, having met and  conferred,  and  having  participated  in  the settlement of a class action lawsuit challenging the calculation of "compensation earnable" have agreed to benefit changes to  SDCERS.  The  benefit  changes resulting from this class  action  settlement  were  approved  by  the  CERS  active and retired membership in June, 2000.
        1. Formula Change for Calculation of SDCERS Monthly Retirement Benefit.

The Retirement Calculation Factor to be applied to the Police  Safety Member's high one year salary at specified ages may be increased from the current levels to those shown below for all retirements effective on or after July 1, 2000, if the Police Safety Member selects this option.

Retirement
Factor
Factor
Age
effective
effective

1/01/97-
07/01/00

6/30/00
[New]

[Current]

50
2.50%
3.00%
51
2.60%
3.00%
52
2.70%
3.00%
53
2.80%
3.00%
54
2.90%
3.00%
55+
2.99%
3.00%

Member Option: Pursuant to the class action settlement,  a  Police Safety Member hired before July 1, 2009, may choose, upon application for retirement, one of the following two options:

            a. The Retirement Calculation Factor in effect on July 1, 2000 with no change in the Police Safety Member's Final Compensation OR
            b. A 10% increase in the Police Safety Member's Final Compensation, with the Police Safety Member's Unmodified Service Retirement Allowance calculated using the Retirement Calculation Factor in effect on June 30, 2000.
This election must be made with SDCERS at the time of application for retirement.
        2. Police Safety Member's SDCERS Contribution Rate Change.

            a. The following paragraphs 2.b. through 2.c. are included in this MOU for historical purposes only and have no force and effect during the term of this MOU.

            b. On July 1, 2001, Police Safety Members' contribution rates to SDCERS will be increased by 0.53%.

            c. Effective July 1, 2000, Police Safety Members' Contribution rates will increase by an additional 0.16% to pay for the cost of providing the choice of Retirement Calculation Factors described above. The additional 0.16% increase will be paid from the Employee Benefit Reserve described in San Diego Municipal Code section 24.1507 until the Reserve is exhausted.
        3. Eligibility for Industrial Disability Retirement Change.

            a. A Police Safety Member may be eligible for  an  industrial  disability retirement if it has been medically determined  that  the  Police  Safety Member has  become  psychologically or mentally incapable  of performing his or her normal  and  customary  duties  as a  result of a  violent  attack  on the  member  with deadly force, such as a shooting or stabbing that causes great bodily  injury,  and  that  resulted  in  a  nervous  or  mental  disorder. This provision will sunset on June  30, 2010,  and  no such applications  may be made after that date.
            b. City agrees to take the following actions necessary to restore Section F.3.a:

                1) Step 1. Contact SDCERS and request a Charter Section 143.1 vote of the Members.
                2) Step 2. Upon a successful vote under Step 1, initiate a Charter Section
143.1 vote of the electorate for the June 2016 election or the next Citywide election whichever is sooner.
                3) Step 3. Implement change after necessary Municipal Code provisions have been adopted by City Council.

    H. 2003 Benefit Changes.

This paragraph is included in this MOU for historical purposes only and has no force and effect during the term of this MOU.
Effective July 1, 2003, City agrees to amend the Municipal Code to provide Safety Member retirement status for Police Recruits on day one of the police academy.
    I. 2009 Benefit Changes.
        1. A Safety Member, who is employed as a sworn officer of City Police Department and is hired by City on or after July 1, 2009 but before July 1, 2013, will not be entitled to a Retirement Calculation Factor of 3% unless and until the Safety Member reaches age 55 with at least ten years of Creditable Service. A Safety Member, who is employed as a sworn officer of City Police Department and is hired by City on or after July 1, 2009, will have the option to retire at age 50 after 20 years of Creditable Service with a proportionately reduced Retirement Calculation Factor, as set forth in the following table.

Retirement Age
Factor effective
07/01/09 for sworn City Police Officers hired on or after July 1, 2009
50
2.50%
51
2.60%
52
2.70%
53
2.80%
54
2.90%
55+
3.00%

        2. Effective July 1, 2009, interest will be credited to a POA Member's DROP account at a rate determined by the SDCERS Board.

    J. New Retirement Factor Computation for Safety Members, Hired On or After January 1, 2012 but before July 1. 2013, as sworn officers of City Police Department.

A Safety Member,  who is employed as  a sworn officer of City Police Department and is hired by City on or after January 1, 2012,  will  not  be  entitled  to  a Retirement  Calculation  Factor of 3% unless and until the Safety Member  reaches age 55 with at least ten 10 years of Creditable Service. A Safety Member, who is employed as a sworn officer of City Police Department  and is hired by City on or after January 1, 2012, will have the option to retire at age of 50 after 20 years of Creditable  Service  with  a  proportionately  reduced  Unmodified   Service Retirement Allowance,  as  follows: Retirement  Calculation  Factor is 2.5% at  age 50; 2.6% at age 51; 2.7%  at  age 52; 2.8% at  age 53; 2.9%  at  age 54; and  3.0%at age 55. For purposes of determining retirement  allowance  for  these  Safety Members, "Final Compensation" will be defined as the average of the Safety Member's three highest  years  of Base  Compensation  at  any  time  during  his  or her Membership in the System.
    K. Benefit Changes After July 1, 2013.
Effective July 1, 2013, Police Recruits will receive a defined contribution retirement plan, the SPSP-H Plan, which is being used as an Interim Defined Contribution Retirement Plan for benefited employees while the City negotiates a permanent plan. The mandatory employee and matching employer contributions are 11% of compensation. Under this plan, employee contributions are post-tax and both employer and employee contributions are immediately 100% vested. Once a Permanent Defined Contribution Retirement Plan is in place for new benefited employees, eligibility for any death and disability benefits offered for employees in the permanent plan will apply retroactively to July 1, 2013.

Effective July 1, 2013, the maximum amount of retirement benefit payable to a sworn police officer, who is hired on or after July 1, 2013 and  who  is  a participant under the Defined Benefit Pension Plan, shall  be  an amount equivalent to 80% of the average of the participant's highest consecutive  36 months of Base Compensation at age 55 as defined by Section 70.1. The maximum set by this provision shall decrease by 3% for each year that the participant retires before age 55.

    L. Elimination of Cost of Living Annuity Benefit for POA Bargaining Unit Members Hired On or After August 1, 2012.

As provided in SDMC section 24.1507(c), employees in POA bargaining units initially hired after July 31, 2012 are not eligible or required to make "cost of living annuity contributions" to the Retirement System, as defined in San Diego Municipal Code section 24.1507, and will not be eligible to receive the cost of living annuity when they retire.

    M. Other Benefits

        1. The surviving spouse of a Member who is killed while in the performance of duty is entitled to continued health coverage as provided in California Labor Code Section 4856. (Please refer to Article 67, Line of Duty Death).

        2. The modified special death benefit provided to the surviving spouse of a Member killed in the  line of duty is amended to eliminate  the requirement that the benefit be discontinued if the spouse remarries. Any benefit terminated to such spouse as a result of remarriage will  be  reinstated effective January 1, 1997.

    N. Retiree Health Benefits

Notwithstanding any provision in this MOU to the contrary, the retiree health benefits for employees who retire on or after April 1, 2012 are determined by the
City's MOU (including amendment with POA), which the City Council adopted by San Diego Ordinance 0-20135 (February 17, 2012) and amended by San Diego Ordinance 0-20173 (June 26, 2012), and Chapter 2, Article 9 of the San Diego Municipal Code.


ARTICLE 45

LONG TERM DISABILITY PLAN
    A. City will continue to offer a LTD Income Plan to eligible members of the Police Unit and Police Management Unit. This Article generally describes the benefits available under this LTD Income Plan. Specific provisions are set forth in the LTD Income Plan on file with City Clerk. To apply for this benefit employees must be disabled (unable to work as a result of injury, accident, illness or pregnancy),  subject to medical disablement  certification.  Benefits do not start for thirty (30) calendar days from the date of disability and continue for the next twelve (12) months. The benefit is seventy percent (70%) of basic biweekly earnings, less all other income benefits while totally disabled. To qualify for benefits you must file a claim on an approved form available from the Risk Management or the Police Personnel Office. The  claim  must be submitted within sixty (60) days of disability date, or within sixty (60) days of the date an employee is first aware of the disabling condition. If a claim is denied, the employee may appeal the decision to Mayor or his or her designee within ten (10) working days.

    B. City agrees to meet and confer with POA prior to making any changes in this Plan.
    C. City will issue a RFP to fully insure and administer the LTD Program by an outside vendor. The parties will meet and confer over any impacts as a result of the implementation a new LTD program.

    D. The parties agree to continue to meet and confer over City's LTD Program and administration of the program by an outside vendor.

ARTICLE 46 REOPENERS
    A. The provisions of this MOU, together with those provisions of wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment  subject to meet and  confer currently in existence and not changed by this MOU will not be revised to adversely affect the employees in this unit during the term of this MOU.
    B. POA agrees that, should City introduce a proposal to amend  Charter  in  a manner that would change the reporting relationship of the Personnel Director
from the Civil Service Commission to the Mayor, that POA will promptly meet and confer, at any time during the term of this MOU, regarding any aspects of that proposal that would affect wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of employment.
    C. Any claim of a violation of this provision will be pursued solely through the grievance procedure.
    D. Nothing in this MOU affects or impairs the rights, if any, of City or POA granted pursuant to California Government Code section 3504.5.
    E. This Article does not apply to any policy, procedure, or practice established by a member of the unit which was not approved by a superior authority. Those policies, procedures and practices established by a member  of the  unit and known by an unclassified police manager are deemed to be approved.
    F. The Parties acknowledge that this Article in no way diminishes the exercise of Management's Rights as provided for in Article 9.

    G. Pawgraph A of this Article does  not  apply  to  any  enactment  of  any  Police Review Board or Commission. However,  the  policies  and  procedures  of  this Board or Commission  are  subject  to meet  and confer  to  the  extent  required by the MMBA.
    H. Department Management and POA agree to meet and confer on issues regarding the qualifications for an industrial disability requirement and  related  issues which are subject to meet and confer. The meet and confer will commence upon request of POA.
    I. The parties acknowledge that four of the City's recognized employee organizations have filed a consolidated unfair labor practice charge with the California Public Employment Relations Board (PERE) related to Proposition B (PERE litigation). The parties acknowledge that the City and the four employee organizations involved in the PERE litigation have the right, under California Government Code section 3509.5 and other applicable law, to exhaust all appeals if aggrieved as a result of a final decision by PERE. This right includes filing a writ of extraordinary relief with the California Court of Appeal and taking any other action in any court of competent jurisdiction that is authorized by law. Nothing in this MOU is intended to waive that right.  If, in the PERE litigation, a court of competent jurisdiction, following exhaustion of all appeals, issues a final order or decision declaring Proposition B to be unlawful or invalid, in whole or in part, the parties to this MOU agree to reopen negotiations, upon request by a party, on that provision or aspect of Proposition B declared to be unlawful or invalid. If, in the PERE litigation, a court of competent jurisdiction, following exhaustion of all appeals, issues a final order or decision declaring Proposition B to be lawfully adopted, the  parties to this MOU agree to reopen negotiations, upon request by a party, on any provisions or aspects of Proposition B not yet
implemented. The parties agree that, regardless of the outcome of the PERB litigation or exercise of this reopener, the  provisions regarding limitations  to base compensation and to other pensionable pay components set forth in Article 25 will remain in effect.

    J. At the request of either the  City or POA during the  term of this MOU,  the parties will meet and confer over the implementation of a death and disability benefit for employees who are covered by the Interim Defined Contribution Plan.

    K. In the event either party desires to reopen the MOU  and  meet  and confer in good faith for Fiscal Year 2019 and Fiscal Year 2020, it will serve upon the other its written request to commence meeting and conferring in good faith, as well as its  written non-economic  proposals by October 2, 2017.   POA will submit its economic proposals no later than January 8, 2018. Upon receipt of the written notice and proposals, meet and confer over non-economic proposals will begin no later than November 6, 2017, and meet and confer over economic proposals will begin no later than January 22, 2018.

    L. The City agrees to notify POA by October 16, 2017 of its non-economic proposals and will submit its economic proposals no later than January 22, 2018. If federal or state governments take action that has a direct effect upon the areas which fall within the scope of representation, the City may submit proposals concerning these areas at later dates. Any terms and conditions of this MOU, not subject to this reopener provision shall remain in force and effect. The impasse hearing will take place in advance of the first reading of the salary ordinance for Fiscal Year 2018.

    M. The City will request the City Council to schedule an impasse hearing if necessary after 5:00 p.m. on a regular work day in order to permit POA Bargaining Unit members the opportunity to attend and testify.

    N. Unless otherwise agreed to, the parties agree that POA's final economic and non-economic offers are due by February 19, 2018 and the City's final economic and non-economic offers are due March 5, 2018. POA agrees to provide the City a written statement of its positions regarding any issues should there be impasse.

0. The City will conduct or have conducted a total compensation survey of the largest municipal/government organizations within the  County  of San Diego, and within the State  of California,  as  determined  by the City. The City will have the compensation survey completed in time for the initiation of bargaining for the reopener in Fiscal Year 2019 and Fiscal Year 2020.  The City will meet and consult with POA over the list of agencies it will use for the compensation survey.





    P. By no later than October 3, 2016, the parties will reopen negotiations on health care benefits for current employees. The purpose of the negotiations will be to determine if modification to the current Flexible Benefit Plan can result in lower out-of-pocket expenses for current employees. The negotiations will proceed with a two-step process as follows:

Step 1, the City and POA along with the City's other five recognized employee organizations to conduct a joint study which will review and analyze healthcare related subjects including:

        1. Current plans for all employees
        2. Potential plan design changes
        3. Number of plans available to employees
        4. Health Reimbursement Arrangement Accounts (HRA Accounts)
        5. Number of health care providers for employees
        6. The Affordable Health Care Act
        7. Use of Voluntary Employees' Beneficiary Association (VEBA)
        8. Restrictions on employee's ability to opt out of coverage
        9. Wellness Program

Step 2, the parties will then meet and confer over the issue.

    Q. By no later than October  3, 2016, the  City and  POA will commence  a  Rewards and  Recognition  Study  to  evaluate  the  current  rewards  and  recognition programs and policies  within individual  City departments,  and meet and  confer over a standardized Citywide Rewards and Recognition Program that promotes positive morale and recognizes employee excellence.

    R. By no later than October 3, 2016, the City and POA along with the City's other five recognized employee organizations will begin to meet and confer over modifications to the City's Employee Relations Resolution contained in Council Policy 300-06 to comply with the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act as amended August 1, 2012.


ARTICLE 47 PROBATION PERIOD
All new employees will be subject to a twelve (12) month probation period which will commence upon appointment as a sworn member of the Department.
ARTICLE 48 WELLNESS
During the term of this Agreement, City will fund $35,000 on  an  annual basis to be used for the maintenance or purchase of weight machines and/or similar equipment. The Parties will discuss and mutually agree on the expenditure of these funds through the Labor-Management Committee.

ARTICLE 49 TRANSPORTATION INCENTIVES
City intends  to  make  modifications  to  the  Transportation  Alternative  Program (TAP) during the term of this MOU.   City agrees to meet and confer,  as  required by law, over any changes which  have a  significant  or adverse  impact  to wages,  hours, and other terms and conditions of  employment.  The  specific  changes  are  being drafted  and  will be presented to POA as  soon as  is  practicable.   Pending  review of the changes, the following provisions will continue to apply:
    A. Employees who use the Concourse Parkade and pay on a monthly basis will be charged fifty percent (50%) of the prevailing general public monthly rate.
    B. Employees participating in the TAP will pay fifty percent (50%) of the public daily rate, for up to fifty-two (52) instances per year. Participation in  this program is limited, and available on a first-come first serve basis.
    C. City will provide a seventy five percent (75%) reimbursement up to $100.00 per month to those employees who wish to purchase monthly passes for transportation on the public bus, trolley, and commuter rail service. Transportation passes will be for the exclusive use of the employee/purchaser. City will provide an equal amount to employees who use the San Diego Bay ferry and to employees participating in a City approved vanpool program. Employees must use these subsidized transportation services to commute  to and  from work at least three days per  week  to be eligible for reimbursement. Payments for passes are made payable to City Treasurer  no later than the 12th  day of the current month for the next month's pass. Payment is loaded  on  to issued Compass Cards.
    D. City will provide reimbursement to employees who use the Concourse Parkade and carry riders. The rate of reimbursement will be calculated so that  an employee who carries three riders will receive free parking.
ARTICLE 50 PREFERRED SHIFT SELECTION
    A. All uniformed police officers with twelve (12) or more years of service on the Department are eligible to receive  their preference of shift  assignment  within the area in which they are working, provided the employee is meeting performance standards. There will be two (2) preferred shift officer positions per service area per watch in every patrol division, except Northwestern. Northwestern patrol division will have one (1) preferred shift officer per service area per watch. There will be two (2) preferred shift officer positions  per watch in traffic division.
    B. All preferential assignments are considered permanent; however, the employee has the  option of requesting a change in his or her  preference of assignment  to be effective at any shift change. Any request for preferred shift selection, either initially or for change, will be made in writing to the area captain at least thirty
(30) calendar days prior to a shift change. Exercise of this privilege can only be made at a shift change or by command approval.
    C. While the employee may request a choice of area of assignment, it is the responsibility of the appropriate commands to assure that preferential shift assignments are designated equitably throughout all area commands.
    D. The Department will make reasonable efforts to allow each preferred shift position at least one shift that includes Saturday and Sunday off during the calendar year.
    E. It is the intent of the Chief of Police to keep this policy in effect as long as it is feasible to do so. This right may be revoked by the Chief of Police whenever it is deemed to be in the best interest of the Department.

ARTICLE 52 MODIFICATION AND WAIVER
    A. Reasonable written notice will be given to POA if affected by any ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation directly relating to matters within the  scope  of representation proposed to be adopted or changed by City Council,  Retirement Board, Civil Service Commission, or by Department Heads and  Assistant Department Heads, and POA will be given the opportunity to meet with the appropriate body or person prior to adoption of any change, as required by law.
    B. In cases of emergency pursuant to Charter, when City determines that an ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation must be adopted immediately without prior notice or meeting with POA, City Council or the board or commission of City responsible for the changes will provide such notice to POA and an
opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time following the adoption of such ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation.

ARTICLE 53
OVERPAYMENTS TO CITY EMPLOYEES AND REPAYMENT OF FUNDS

    A. Overpayment.

        1. If it has been discovered that an overpayment or unauthorized payment has been made to a City employee, it is the responsibility of the department to notify the employee in writing and supply the employee with the documentation used to determine the overpayment.

        2. If the  employee  contends  that  any portion or the  entire  amount  is  not owed, he or she may request a meeting with the appointing authority to attempt to resolve the disagreement. If the dispute about the payment originates in another department, the employee has a right to request a meeting with the appointing authority in that department. The department will notify the employee that he or she  may have a representative attend such meeting(s) with him or her. If the dispute regarding overpayment arises from the interpretation of a personnel regulation or administrative regulation, the employee may grieve this matter directly to the Department Head level.

    B. Repayment of Funds.

        1. An employee will pay no penalties, fees or interest as a result of the overpayment. The employee will have the right to select one of the three following options for the repayment of the funds:

            a. Lump sum payment with the date mutually established by the employee and the department (lump sum payments must be made  if  the  total amount due is five percent (5%) or less than the employee's biweekly salary);

            b. Biweekly installment payments through payroll deduction (installment payments must be a minimum of $10.00 and repayment  must  be completed within twenty six (26) pay periods); or

            c. Any other repayment arrangement  mutually  agreed upon between City and the employee.

        2. The final agreement on the repayment will be committed to writing, with the lump sum payment date, or the biweekly amount and the  beginning and ending date of the installment plan identified. Disputes over repayment of
funds which were overpaid to an employee through no fault of the employee, will not be a factor in employee performance reports or discipline.

    C. Referral to Collections.

A department may refer an employee to the Treasurer, Collections Section only when the employee, after being duly notified of the overpayment and having had the opportunity to review the relevant documentation, refuses to agree to a repayment of the amount owed. The employee will be notified of the referral and informed that the Collections Section will proceed with collection as it would for any other debtor.

ARTICLE 54 CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS
The Parties agree that POA may make use of intra-departmental mail systems and mail slots, from time to time, to conduct POA elections or votes on issues among its members. There will be no interference with the conduct of this POA business by management of the Department or City.

ARTICLE 56

CORE INSTRUCTOR PAY
All Core Instructors assigned to the Training Development Division will receive special assignment pay which is equal in salary range to Police Sergeant. Core Instructors will retain their current pay step in the  higher  salary  range and  would be eligible for merit increases at their normal review dates. Further, all Core Instructors would continue to be eligible to receive the training pay differential as outlined in Article 28.

ARTICLE 57
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM
A random Drug and Alcohol Testing Program has been implemented and applies to all sworn personnel.
    A. Procedures.

        1. The Chief of Police or his or her designee will administer  the Drug and Alcohol Testing Program.
        2. All officers will be tested twice every eighteen (18) months by urinalysis, which will be screened for the presence of specific drugs.
        3. The drug screemng will be conducted to detect only the following drug groups:

            a. Amphetamines/Methamphetamines (e.g. Speed, Crystal);
            b. Benzodiazepines (e.g. Valium, Librium, Oxazepam, Serax, Dalmane, Ativan);

            c. Barbiturates	(e.g.	Amobarbital, Phenobarbital, Secobarbital);

            d. Cocaine;
            e. Methadone;
            f. Ethanol;
            g. Opiates (e.g. Codeine, Heroin, Morphine);
            h. Phencyclidine (PCP);
            i. THC (Marijuana); and
            j. Hallucinogenics (e.g. LSD).
Butabarbital,	Pentobarbital,

        4. Officers will be assigned a confidential number for testing purposes. Numbers will be selected on a random basis, using a secured computer program.
        5. Officers may provide appropriate documentation of legally-prescribed medications. The documentation will be included in the review of test results by the testing facility.

    B. Sample Collection.

        1. Medical Contractor's (MC) personnel will be responsible for obtaining the urine sample from the officer being tested.

        2. MC's personnel will be available for test processing between 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. hours, five (5) days per week, to allow officers to be tested during normal work hours. (Hours vary at some MC locations.)
        3. MC's personnel will not observe the officer as the sample is being given.

        4. Officers to be tested will be notified at the start of their shift. They will present themselves for testing at the earliest  possible  time during the shift, and no later than four (4) hours after being notified that they are to be tested. Refusals or failures to complete the test as required will be referred by the Chief of Police or his or her designee to the Command for investigation and
appropriate discipline up to and including termination.	Officers who fail to appear for testing will be scheduled to test their next working day.
        5. At the MC's site, the officer being tested will:
            a. Identify himself or herself by presenting his or her Department identification or California driver's license.
            b. Complete requested paperwork.

            c. Remove jackets, bags or other bulky items of clothing prior to entering the testing area.
            d. Provide a urine sample.
                1) Officers will be required to stay within the MC's facility until the required sample is given.
                2) Sample must be at least 45 ml, the mm1mum amount required for testing purposes.
        6. At the MC's site, the Medical Assistant (MA) will:
            a. Have the officer wash his or her hands and provide the officer with a pair of gloves. Washing  hands  and wearing gloves is  required  when providing the specimen. Failure or refusal to do so will be documented by the MA.

            b. Direct the officer being tested to a private lavatory.

            c. Assure that the lavatory is secured in accordance with established City procedures.

            d. Wait outside the lavatory for the sample.
            e. Upon receipt of the urine sample, and in  the  presence  of the  officer,  the MA will:
                1) Split the sample into two unused separate containers which will be referred to as test sample and control sample.
                2) Seal the containers.

            f. Complete the  appropriate chain-of-custody forms for the samples.

            g. Refrigerate both the test sample and the control sample until the samples are picked up by the laboratory courier.
    C. Screening Procedure.
        1. The initial screening of all collected  samples  will  generally  be  conducted within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt  by  a  City-designated  Laboratory certified by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).

        2. Initial screening of urine samples will be conducted using a testing methodology based primarily upon an "Enzyme Immunoassay" or other testing methodology of equivalent quality and acceptability.
        3. If a confirmation test is required, it will be conducted by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) testing or other testing methodology of equivalent quality and acceptability.

        4. Upon receipt of a sample for testing, the designated laboratory will:
            a. Check the container to ensure it  is not damaged,  and  that the seal is intact.
            b. Complete the appropriate chain-of-custody forms for the  sample.
            c. Conduct the initial testing of the sample using an "Enzyme Immunoassay" technique or other testing methodology of equivalent quality and acceptability.
            d. If the sample tests "negative," all urine samples will be discarded.
            e. If the sample tests "positive," a confirmation test will be performed for the specific drug or drugs found in the sample during the initial test.
            f. If the confirmation test confirms the presence of drugs, any remainder of the test sample and the entire control sample will be retained in a locked freezer for a minimum of one (1) year.

            g. If the confirmation test is "negative," the whole test will be considered negative and all urine samples will be destroyed.

        5. Alcohol Test.

            a. The standard  for  alcohol  testing  will  be  the  converted  urinalysis equivalent of a blood alcohol level of 0.02 percent.
            b. An alcohol testing level of 0.02 percent will be treated  as a "positive" result and may be cause for disciplinary action.  Any measurable  amount of alcohol will be cause for mandatory referral of the officer to City's Employee Assistance Program.
    D. Reporting Test Results.
        1. Test results will be provided to Personnel Department's Medical Program Administrator by the MC.
        2. The officer will be notified of his or her test results in writing without delay.

        3. If test results are positive, the Executive Assistant Chief of Internal Affairs will be notified, and will be responsible for initiating an investigation.

    E. Independent Testing.

        1. If the test results are positive, the affected officer has the right to require independent testing of the control sample. The request must be made to the Executive Assistant Chief of Internal Affairs by the officer within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the notice of drug test results indicating that the officer's drug test was positive and a representative from the Department is being contacted. The right of the officer to independent testing of the control sample includes:
            a. The right to designate the laboratory, which must be a SAMHSA certified laboratory.

            b. The right to designate the type of test to be conducted in order to identify substances that will cause a positive finding for the test sample.
            c. The designation of the test to be performed will be communicated by the affected officer directly to the laboratory selected and is a confidential communication protected by the  medical privacy privilege which extends to all communications between or on behalf of the affected officer and the independent test laboratory and its personnel. The privilege is waived if section F.2 is applicable.
        2. If, in any proceedings involving an appeal from a notice of adverse action based upon a positive drug test sample, the employee intends to challenge the accuracy of the	results  of  the		test sample or intends to introduce into evidence, whether during direct examination, cross-examination, or rebuttal, any evidence whether testimonial or documentary which results from the affected officer's demand for independent testing, the affected officer will, without delay, and prior to any appeal hearing, including the Skelly meeting, furnish to the Department a copy of all reports setting forth the result of the testing of the  control sample.	If the reports are not provided prior to the Skelly meeting, the reports may not be used in any future appeal hearing.
        3. If testing is done to confirm the presence of the drug or drugs identified in the original test, it will be done in accordance with SAMHSA's Mandatory Guidelines regarding Retesting of a Specimen, which provides the amount of sample necessary for a retest is not subject to a specific cut-off requirement
but  must provide  data sufficient to confirm the  presence of the	drug or metabolite.
        4. The officer and his or her representative will make all necessary arrangements for transport and preservation of the control sample to the independent testing laboratory designated by the affected officer. He or she will first inform City's Random Drug Testing Coordinator, who in turn will initially contact City's Laboratory to provide for release of the sample to the officer's courier.
        5. All costs associated with independent testing will be borne by the officer.

    F. Program Records.
        1. All drug testing information relating to individual officers 1s strictly confidential.
        2. All records related to the Drug and Alcohol Testing Program will be maintained as directed by the Personnel Director.
    G. Use of Test Results.
The Random Drug Testing Program is considered an administrative matter, and the results of this test will not be used in any criminal action. However, if additional information is available through other means to support criminal action against an employee, the Department will not be precluded from taking further action.

ARTICLE 58 CATASTROPHIC LEAVE PLAN
    A. Purpose.

Establish a City-administered Catastrophic Leave Bank (Leave Bank) permitting City employees to assist other City employees who face extended leaves without pay due to a catastrophic occurrence in their lives. For the purpose of this plan, a "catastrophic occurrence" is defined as any event that would qualify the employee under the FMLA as determined by Mayor or his or her designee. Catastrophic Leave determinations are non-grievable.

    B. Procedures.
        1. The employee must have exhausted or expect to exhaust his or her accrued leave (to be verified by the Department payroll specialist), as a result of a qualifying event in order to establish a Leave Bank.
            a. If an employee is diagnosed as terminally ill, a Leave Bank may be established without meeting this requirement. In such cases, the donated leave will be paid out when the employee leaves work due to illness. A recipient's total annual leave balance, including donated leave cannot exceed 2080 hours.
            b. The employee has received  approval for  an  unpaid leave of absence  from his or her Department Head.

        2. Requests to establish a Leave Bank for receipt of donations will be processed by the Human Resources Department.

            a. An eligible employee will submit a completed "Request to Establish Catastrophic Leave Bank" form to the Human Resources Director, accompanied by:

                1) A medical statement from the attending physician, including a brief statement of the  nature of the  illness or injury and an estimated time the employee will be unable to work, or other appropriate documentation supporting the request in accordance with state and federal law.
                2) Evidence of the Department Head's approval of leave of absence.
        3. Donations of annual leave may be made to an employee eligible for catastrophic leave. The donor department will be billed for the dollar amount of the donor's annual leave donation.

            a. Donations of leave will be strictly voluntary; the identity of Leave Bank donors will be held in absolute confidence.
            b. Employees may only donate accrued annual leave.

            c. Donations must be made in whole hour increments. There 1s no tax benefit to the donor.
            d. Donors must have an overall annual leave balance of one-hundred and sixty (160) hours remaining after donated time has been deducted.

            e. Once donated to an individual, donated leave cannot be reclaimed by the donor.

            f. Employees wishing to donate time will complete a "Confidential Authorization  for Catastrophic Leave Donation" form and  submit it to their department Payroll Specialist, who will:

                1) Verify that the donating employee has the minimum required leave balance of one hundred sixty (160) hours;
                2) Convert the donated time to dollars at the hourly rate of the donor and subtract the donated time from the donor's designated leave category; and
                3) Forward the donation authorization form to the Human Resources Director for tracking and submission to the City Comptroller.
                4) Donation authorization forms which do not contain all requested information will not be processed.
        4. Upon receipt of donation authorizations, the City Comptroller will take the following action:
            a. Convert donated  dollars as computed above into hours at  the hourly rate of the recipient, and add the donated hours to the recipient's annual leave balance. Recipient will be taxed for the leave when it is taken.
            b. Retain a confidential file of donation authorizations.
            c. All deductions (e.g. health premiums, parking, credit union, union dues, etc.) which have previously been authorized by the recipient will be made unless notified in writing by the recipient to cancel deductions.
        5. Donated time is treated as annual leave accrued by the recipient of the donation.   Payments up to eighty (80) hours per pay period will be made to the recipient until the donated leave has been exhausted.

            a. Donated time does not alter the employment rights of City  or  the recipient, nor extend or alter limitations otherwise applicable to leaves of absence or annual leave, except as noted in this Article.
            b. Employees who are using donated annual leave hours will continue to accrue annual leave in accordance with Personnel Manual Index Code I-2, Annual Leave.

ARTICLE 59 SIDE LETTERS
Effective July 1, 2007, all side letters signed  by  both  Parties  not  specifically referenced  by the  current  MOU  will expire  and  be of no further  force  and  effect. The current MOU as printed will represent all agreements between POA and City. Effective July 1, 2015,  any  additional agreements  must be made in writing between City and POA with the approval of the Mayor or his or her designee, the Human Resources Director, and the POA President or his or her designee.
ARTICLE 60 MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT
"C" Mileage reimbursement will be paid in accordance with the current IRS Standard Mileage Rates for business reimbursement.

ARTICLE 61

SPECIAL PAY FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ASSIGNMENTS
Police Sergeants assigned to specialized administrative assignments as designated specifically by the Chief of Police will receive an additional five percent (5%) of their base rate, effective July 1, 2003.

ARTICLE 62 SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
A. Police Officer Ill's, Sergeants, Detectives, and Agents, who are assigned to Third
Watch, or if the majority of their regularly scheduled work shift falls after 2100 hours will receive additional compensation of five point three percent (5.3%) of the employee's base rate. Police Officer Ill's, Sergeants, Detectives, and Agents, who are assigned to Second Watch or if the majority of their regularly scheduled work shift falls after 1800 hours will receive additional compensation of three point eight percent (3.8%) of the employee's base rate. In addition, the Lieutenants assigned to the Watch Commander's Office and  Communications will be eligible for this shift differential.

B Police Officer ll's ("A" "C" "D" and "E" Steps)  Police Officer Is and Recruits
'	'	'
who are assigned to Third Watch, or if the majority of their regularly scheduled
work shift falls after 2100 hours, will receive additional compensation based on five point three percent (5.3%) of Police Officer ll's ("E" Step) base rate. Police Officer ll's ("A," "C," "D," and "E" steps), Police Officer I's and Recruits who are assigned to Second Watch, or if the majority of their regularly scheduled work shift falls after 1800 hours, will receive additional compensation based on three point eight percent (3.8%) of Police Officer ll's ("E" Step) base rate.

ARTICLE 63

SPECIALTY PAYS
    A. Community Relations Officers.
Community Relations Officers will receive additional compensation of three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee's base rate while assigned as a Community Relations Officer.
    B. Emergency Negotiators.
Emergency Negotiators will receive additional compensation of three and one­ half percent (3.5%) of employee's base rate while assigned as Emergency Negotiators.
    C. K-9 Trainers.

K-9 Trainers will receive additional compensation of three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee's base rate while assigned as a K-9 Trainer.

    D. K-9 Officers.
K-9 handlers assigned a dog will receive additional compensation of three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee's base rate while assigned to the unit.
    E. Accident Investigation Bureau.
Members of the Accident Investigation Bureau (AIB) unit who have successfully completed the POST Traffic Collision Reconstruction Course will receive an additional compensation of four percent (4%) of their base rate.
    F. Harbor Unit.

        1. Full-time members of the  Harbor Unit will receive additional compensation of four percent (4%) of base pay, while assigned to the Harbor Unit.

        2. Selected Harbor-trained officers who maintain their skill level through Department-paid training will continue to receive additional compensation of four percent (4%) of their base pay. The number of officers to receive this pay will be based upon the discretion of the Department Management.
    G. Trainer Pay.

Officers working as trainers, as determined by the Chief of  Police,  while assigned as and performing the duties of a trainer in the manner specified by the Department will receive additional compensation of three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee's base rate.

    H. Motorcycle Pay

Members of the unit will receive  an  additional  three and one-half  percent  (3.5%) of employee's base rate when assigned to two-wheel motorcycles.
    I. SWATPay
        1. Employees in the classifications of Police Officer II, Police Officer III, Police Agent, Police Sergeant, and Police Lieutenant assigned to the SWAT will
receive an additional three and one-half percent (3.5%)  of employee's  base pay.
        2. SWAT officers that are members of the Special Response Team (SRT) will receive an additional three and one-half percent (3.5%) of employee base pay. Snipers will also be eligible to receive this additional pay.

ARTICLE 64

PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS PROCEDURAL BILL OF RIGHTS ACT
City agrees to include the following language of the POBOR Act in the MOU. The Parties enter into this MOU with the understanding that any legislative or case law changes to the POBOR  made during the term of the  contract will be applicable to the Parties but will not cause City to update this Article of the MOU, for purposes of republishing the MOU, during the term of the contract.
GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 3300-3312
3300. This chapter is known and may be cited as the Public Safety Officers Procedural Bill of Rights Act.

3301. For purposes of this chapter, the term public safety officer means  all peace officers specified in Sections 830.1, 830.2, 830.3, 830.31, 830.32, 830.33, except
subdivision (e), 830.34, 830.35, except subdivision (c), 830.36, 830.37, 830.38, 830.4, and 830.5 of the Penal Code.  The Legislature hereby finds and declares that the rights and protections provided to peace officers under this chapter constitute a matter of statewide concern. The Legislature further finds  and  declares  that effective law enforcement depends upon the maintenance of stable employer­ employee relations, between public safety employees and their employers.  In order to assure that stable relations are continued  throughout  the  state and to further assure that effective services are provided to all people of the state, it is necessary that this chapter be applicable to all public safety officers, as defined in this section, wherever situated within the State of California.
3302. (a) Except as otherwise provided by law, or whenever on duty or in uniform, no public safety officer shall be prohibited from engaging, or be coerced or required to engage, in political activity.

(b) No public safety officer  shall be prohibited from seeking election to, or serving as a member of, the governing board of a school district.
3303. When any public safety officer is under investigation and subjected to interrogation by his or her commanding officer, or any other member of the employing public safety department, that could lead to punitive action, the
interrogation shall be conducted under the following conditions. For the purpose of this chapter, punitive action means any action that may lead to dismissal, demotion, suspension, reduction in salary, written reprimand, or transfer for purposes of punishment.

    (a) The interrogation shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably at a time when the public safety officer is on duty, or during the normal waking hours for the public safety officer, unless the seriousness of the investigation requires otherwise. If the interrogation does occur during off-duty time of the public safety officer being interrogated, the public safety officer shall be compensated for any off-duty time in accordance with regular department procedures, and  the  public safety officer  shall not be released from employment for any work missed.
    (b) The public safety officer under investigation  shall be informed  prior to the interrogation of the rank, name, and command of the officer in charge of the interrogation, the interrogating officers, and all other persons to be present during the interrogation. All questions directed  to the  public safety officer under interrogation shall be asked by and through no more than two interrogators at one time.
    (c) The public safety officer under investigation shall be informed of the nature of the  investigation prior to any interrogation.
    (d) The interrogating session shall be for a reasonable period taking into consideration gravity and complexity of the issue being investigated. The person under interrogation shall be allowed to attend to his or her own personal physical necessities.
    (e) The public safety officer under interrogation shall not be subjected to offensive language or threatened with punitive action, except that an officer refusing  to respond to questions or submit  to interrogations shall be informed that failure to answer questions directly related to the investigation or interrogation  may result in punitive action.   No promise of reward shall be made as an  inducement  to answering  any question. The employer shall not cause the public safety officer under interrogation to be subjected to visits by the press or news media without his or her express consent nor shall his or her home address or photograph be given to the press or news media without his or her express consent.
    (f) No statement made during interrogation by a public safety officer under duress, coercion, or threat of punitive action shall be admissible in any subsequent civil proceeding. This subdivision is subject to the following qualifications:
        (1) This subdivision shall not limit the use of statements made by a public safety officer when the employing public safety department
is	seeking	civil  sanctions	against	any public safety officer, including disciplinary action brought under Section 19572.
        (2) This subdivision shall not prevent the admissibility of statements made by the public safety officer under interrogation in any civil action, including administrative actions, brought by that public safety officer, or that officer's exclusive representative, arising out of a disciplinary action.

        (3) This subdivision shall not prevent statements made by a public safety officer under interrogation from being used to impeach the testimony of that officer after an in camera review to determine whether the statements serve to impeach the testimony of the officer.
        (4) This subdivision shall not otherwise prevent the admissibility of statements  made by a public safety officer under interrogation if that officer subsequently is deceased.
    (g) The complete interrogation of a public safety officer may be recorded. If a tape recording is made of the interrogation, the public safety officer shall have access to the tape if any  further proceedings are contemplated or prior to any further interrogation at a subsequent time. The public safety officer shall be entitled to a transcribed copy of any notes made by a stenographer or to any reports or complaints made by investigators or other persons, except those which are deemed by the investigating agency to be confidential. No notes or reports that are deemed to be confidential may be entered in the officer's personnel file. The public safety officer being interrogated shall have the right to bring his or her own recording device and record any and all aspects of the interrogation.
    (h) If prior to or during the interrogation of a public safety officer it  is deemed that he or she may be charged with a criminal offense, he or she shall be immediately informed of his or her constitutional rights.

    (i) Upon the filing of a formal written statement of charges, or whenever an interrogation focuses on matters that are likely  to  result  in  punitive action against any public safety officer, that officer, at his or her request, shall have the right to be represented by a representative of his or her choice who may be present at all times during the interrogation. The representative shall not be a  person subject  to the  same investigation. The representative shall not be required to disclose, nor be subject to any punitive action for refusing to disclose, any information received from the officer under investigation for non-criminal  matters. This section shall not apply to any interrogation of a public safety officer in the normal course of duty, counseling, instruction, or informal verbal admonishment by, or other routine or unplanned contact with, a supervisor or any other
public safety officer, nor shall this section apply to an investigation concerned solely and directly with alleged criminal activities.
    (j) No public safety officer shall be loaned or temporarily reassigned to a location or duty assignment if a sworn member of his or her department would not normally  be sent to that location or would not normally be given that duty assignment under similar circumstances.
3304. (a) No public safety officer shall be subjected to punitive action, or denied promotion, or be threatened with any such treatment, because  of the lawful exercise of the rights granted under this chapter, or the exercise of any rights under any existing administrative  grievance procedure. Nothing in this section shall preclude a head of an agency from ordering a public safety officer to cooperate with other agencies involved in criminal investigations. If an officer fails to comply with such an order, the agency may officially charge him or her with insubordination.

    (b) No punitive action, nor denial of promotion on grounds other than merit, shall be undertaken by any public agency against any public safety officer who has successfully completed the probationary period that may be required by his or her employing agency without providing the public safety officer with an opportunity for administrative appeal.
    (c) No Chief of Police may be removed by a public agency, or appointing authority, without providing the  Chief of Police with written notice and the reason or reasons therefore and an opportunity for administrative appeal. For purposes of this subdivision, the removal of a Chief of Police by a public agency or appointing authority, for the purpose of implementing the goals or policies, or both, of the public agency or appointing authority, for reasons including, but not limited to, incompatibility of management styles or as a result of a change in administration, shall be sufficient to constitute "reason or reasons." Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to create  a  property interest, where one does not exist by rule or law, in the job of Chief of Police.
    (d) (1) Except as provided in this subdivision and subdivision (g), no punitive action, nor denial of promotion on grounds other than merit, shall be undertaken for any act, omission, or other allegation of misconduct if the investigation of the allegation is not completed within one year of the public agency's discovery by a person authorized to initiate an investigation of the allegation of an act, omission, or other misconduct. This one-year limitation period shall apply only if the act, omission, or other misconduct occurred on or after January 1, 1998.  In the event that the public agency determines that discipline may be taken, it shall complete its investigation and notify the public safety officer of its proposed discipline by a Letter of Intent or Notice of Adverse Action
articulating the discipline that year, except as provided in paragraph (2). The public agency shall not be required to impose the discipline within that one-year period.
(2)(A) If the act, omission, or other allegation of misconduct is also the subject of a criminal investigation or criminal prosecution, the  time during which the criminal investigation or criminal prosecution  is pending shall toll the one-year time period.

        (B) If the public safety officer waives the one-year time period in writing, the time period shall be tolled for the period of time specified in the written waiver.
        (C) If the investigation is a multi-jurisdictional investigation that reqmres a reasonable extension for coordination of the involved agencies.
        (D) If the investigation involves more than one employee and requires a reasonable extension.
        (E) If the investigation involves an employee who 1s incapacitated or otherwise unavailable.
        (F) If the investigation involves a  matter in civil litigation where the public safety officer is named as a party defendant, the one-year time period shall be tolled while that civil action is pending.

        (G) If the investigation involves a matter in criminal litigation where the complainant is a criminal defendant,  the  one-year  time period shall be tolled during the period of that defendant's criminal investigation and prosecution.
        (H) If the investigation involves an allegation of workers' compensation fraud on the part of the public safety officer.
    (e) Where a pre-disciplinary response or grievance procedure is required or utilized, the time for this response or procedure shall not be governed or limited by this chapter.
    (f) If, after investigation and any pre-disciplinary response or procedure, the public agency decides to impose discipline, the public agency shall notify the public safety officer in writing of its decision to impose discipline, including the  date that the discipline  will be imposed, within 30 days of its decision, except if the public safety officer is unavailable for discipline.
    (g) Notwithstanding the one-year time period specified in subdivision (c), an investigation may be reopened against a public safety officer if both of the following circumstances exist:
    (1) Significant new evidence has been discovered that is likely to affect the outcome of the investigation.
    (2) One of the following conditions exist:
        (A) The evidence could not reasonably have been discovered in the normal course of investigation without resorting to extraordinary measures by the agency.
        (B) The evidence resulted from the public safety officer's pre­ disciplinary response or procedure.
    (h) For those members listed in subdivision (a) of Section 830.2 of the Penal Code, the 30-day time period provided for in subdivision (f) shall not commence with the service of a preliminary notice of adverse action, should the public agency elect to provide the public safety officer with such a notice.
3304.5. An administrative appeal instituted by a public safety officer under this chapter shall be conducted in conformance with rules and procedures adopted by the local public agency.
3305. No public safety officer shall have any comment adverse to his interest entered in his personnel file, or any other file used for any personnel purposes by his employer, without  the  public safety officer having first read and signed the instrument containing the adverse comment indicating he is aware of such comment,  except that such entry may be made if after reading such instrument the public safety officer refuses to sign it. Should a public safety officer refuse to sign, that fact shall be noted on that document, and signed or initialed by such officer.
3306. A public safety officer shall have 30 days within which to file a written response to any adverse comment entered in his personnel  file. Such written response shall be attached to, and shall accompany, the adverse comment.

3306.5.
    (a) Every employer shall, at reasonable times and at  reasonable intervals, upon the request of a public safety officer, during usual business hours, with no loss of compensation to the officer, permit that officer to inspect personnel files that are used or have been used to determine that officer's qualifications for employment, promotion, additional compensation, or termination or other disciplinary action.
    (b) Each employer shall keep each public safety officer's personnel file or a true and correct copy thereof, and shall make the file or copy thereof























3307.
available within a reasonable period of time after a request therefor by the officer.
    (c) If, after examination of the officer's personnel file, the officer believes that any portion of the material is mistakenly or unlawfully placed in the file, the officer may request, in writing, that the mistaken or unlawful portion  be corrected or deleted.	Any request made pursuant to this subdivision  shall  include  a  statement  by  the	officer describing the corrections or deletions from the personnel file requested and the reasons supporting  those  corrections  or  deletions.	A statement submitted pursuant to this subdivision shall become part of the personnel file of the officer.
    (d) Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a request made pursuant to subdivision (c), the employer shall either grant the officer's request or notify the officer of the decision to refuse to grant the request. If the employer refuses to grant the request, in whole or in part, the employer shall state in writing the reasons for refusing  the  request,  and  that written statement shall become part of the personnel file of the officer.


    (a) No public safety officer shall be compelled to submit to a lie detector test against  his or her  will.   No disciplinary action or other recrimination shall be taken against a public safety officer refusing to submit to a lie detector test, nor shall any comment be entered anywhere in the investigator's notes or anywhere else that the public safety officer refused to take, or did not take, a lie detector test, nor shall any testimony or evidence be admissible at a subsequent hearing, trial, or proceeding, judicial or administrative, to the effect that the public safety  officer refused to take, or was subjected to, a lie detector test.
    (b) For the purpose of this section, "lie detector" means a polygraph, deceptograph, voice stress analyzer, psychological stress evaluator, or any other similar device, whether mechanical or electrical, that is used, or the results of which are used, for the purpose of rendering a  diagnostic opinion regarding the honesty or dishonesty of an individual.

3307.5.
        (a) No public safety officer shall be required as a condition of employment by his or her employing public safety department or other public agency to consent to the use of his or her photograph or identity as a public safety officer on the Internet for any purpose if that officer reasonably believes that the disclosure may result in a threat, harassment, intimidation,  or harm to that officer or his or her family.
        (b) Based upon his or her reasonable belief that the disclosure of his or her photograph or identity as a public safety officer on the Internet as described in subdivision (a) may result in a threat, harassment, intimidation, or harm, the officer may notify the department or other public agency to cease and desist from that disclosure. After the notification to cease and desist, the officer, a district attorney, or a United States Attorney may seek an injunction prohibiting any official or unofficial use by the department or other public agency on the Internet of his or her photograph or identity as a public safety officer. The court may impose a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) per day commencing two working days after the date of receipt of the notification to cease and desist.
3308. No public safety officer shall be required or requested for purposes of job assignment or other personnel action to disclose any item of his property, income, assets, source of income, debts or personal or domestic expenditures (including those of any member of his family or household) unless such information is obtained or required under state law or proper legal procedure, tends to indicate a conflict of interest with respect to the performance of his official duties, or is necessary for the employing agency to ascertain the desirability of assigning the public safety officer to a specialized unit in which there is a strong possibility  that bribes or other improper  inducements  may be offered.
3309. No public safety officer  shall have  his locker,  or other space  for storage  that may  be assigned  to him searched except  in  his  presence,  or with  his consent, or unless a valid search warrant has been obtained  or  where  he  has  been notified that a search will be conducted.  This  section  shall  apply  only  to lockers or other space for storage that are owned or leased by the employing agency.

3309.5.
    (a) It shall be unlawful for any public safety department to deny or refuse to any public safety officer the rights and protections guaranteed to him or her by this chapter.
    (b) Nothing in subdivision (h) of Section 111181 shall be construed to affect the  rights and protections  afforded to state public safety officers under this chapter or under Section 832.5 of the Penal Code.
    (c) The superior court shall have initial jurisdiction over any proceeding brought by any public safety officer against any public safety department for alleged violations of this chapter.
    (d) (1) In any case where the superior court finds that a public safety department has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the court
shall render appropriate injunctive or other  extraordinary relief  to remedy the violation and to prevent future violations of a like or similar nature, including, but not limited to, the granting of a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction, or permanent injunction prohibiting the public safety department from taking any punitive action against the public safety officer.
(2) If the court finds that a bad faith or frivolous action or a filing for an improper purpose has  been brought pursuant to this chapter,  the court may order sanctions against the party filing the action,  the  party's attorney, or both pursuant to Sections 128.6 and 128.7 of the  Code of Civil Procedure. Those sanctions may include, but not be limited to, reasonable expenses, including attorney's fees, incurred by a public safety department,  as the  court deems  appropriate. Nothing in  this paragraph is intended to subject actions or filings under this section to rules or standards that are different from those applicable to other civil actions or filings subject to Section 128.6 or 128.7 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
    (e) In addition to the extraordinary relief afforded by this chapter, upon a finding by a superior court that a public  safety department, its employees, agents, or assigns, with respect to acts taken within the scope of employment,  maliciously violated any provision of this chapter with the intent to injure the public safety officer, the public safety department shall, for each and every violation, be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) to be awarded to the public safety officer whose right or protection was denied and for reasonable attorney's fees as may be determined by the court.  If the court so finds, and  there is sufficient evidence to establish  actual damages suffered by the officer whose right or protection was denied, the public safety department shall also be liable for the amount of the actual damages. Notwithstanding these provisions, a public safety department may not be required to indemnify a contractor  for the  contractor's  liability pursuant to this subdivision if there is, within the contract between  the  public safety department and the contractor, a "hold harmless" or similar provision that protects the public safety department from liability for the actions of the contractor. An individual shall not be liable for any act for which a public safety department is liable under this section.
3310. Any public agency which has adopted, through action of its governing body or its official designee, any procedure which at a minimum provides to peace officers the same rights or protections as provided pursuant to this chapter shall not be subject to this chapter with regard to such a procedure.

3311. Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to limit the use of any public safety agency or any public safety officer in the fulfilling of mutual aid agreements with other jurisdictions or agencies, nor shall this chapter be construed in any way to limit any jurisdictional or interagency cooperation
under any circumstances where such activity is deemed necessary or desirable by the jurisdictions or the agencies involved.
3312. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the employer of a public safety officer may not take any punitive action against  an officer for wearing  a pin or displaying any other item containing the American flag, unless the employer gives the officer written notice that includes all of the following:

    (a) A statement that the officer's pin or other item violates an existing rule, regulation, policy, or local agency agreement or contract regarding the wearing of a pin, or the displaying of any other item, containing the American flag.
    (b) A citation to the specific rule, regulation, policy, or local agency agreement or contract that the pinor other item violates.
    (c) A statement that the officer may file an appeal against the employer challenging the alleged violation pursuant to applicable grievance or appeal procedures adopted by the department or public agency that otherwise comply with existing law.

3313.  In  the  2005-06  fiscal year,  the  Commission  on State Mandates  shall  review its  statement of decision regarding the  Peace Officer Procedural Bill of Rights test claim and make any modifications necessary to this decision to clarify whether the subject legislation imposed a  mandate  consistent  with  the California Supreme Court Decision in San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on State Mandates  (2004)  33 Cal.4th 859 and  other  applicable court decisions. If the Commission on State Mandates revises its statement of decision regarding the Peace Officer Procedural Bill of Rights test claim, the revised decision shall apply to local government Peace  Officer  Procedural  Bill of Rights activities occurring after the date the revised decision is adopted.

ARTICLE 65

EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONAL LEAVE
The Parties agree to reopen negotiations on the issue of Employee Organizational Leave after further legal analysis on the  tax  limitations on this proposal and  after the Parties agree on how POA will fund it.

ARTICLE 66

LABOR-MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
A Labor-Management Committee is hereby created, which will consist of the President of POA and his or her designee, and two (2) Board members of POA, and two representatives designated by the Chief of Police, and the Human Resources
Director or his or  her  designee.  The  Committee  will meet  quarterly for the  purpose of informally resolving open issues, and improving  communication  between  the parties. Any agreements reached at the Committee  meetings  will  be  reduced  to writing and signed off by parties.

ARTICLE 67 LINE OF DUTY DEATH
City will pay for the reasonable burial and interment expenses for the family of any officer killed in the line of duty, not to exceed $5,000.00. City will also provide an additional $5,000.00 to the family of an officer killed in the line of duty, to use at their discretion. City will pay for the highest cost HMO health  plan for  the surviving spouse and eligible dependents of any officer killed in the line of duty by external violence or physical force, or as a result of an accident or injury caused by external violence or physical force and suffered in the line of duty.

ARTICLE 68 EFFECT OF MOU
This MOU has  no effect  or impact on any  litigation  pending between POA and  City, or any  other current  litigation concerning  its  members  (including  former  members) or their rights. This MOU has no effect or impact on any pending claims, including denied claims where the statute of limitations has not run.

ARTICLE 69 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Paid Bereavement Leave of up to five (5) days is available for use during each fiscal year of this MOU upon the death of an employee's spouse, father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter (son or daughter to include: step-, foster, or adopted), or state­ registered domestic partner, with a limit of one eligible death per fiscal year.  Proof of death (death certificate, obituary, funeral program, etc.) must be provided before an employee can be paid for Bereavement Leave, which is in addition to Annual Leave and must be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days of when the employee returns to work.

ARTICLE 70
AGENCY SHOP AND DUES DEDUCTION•
    A. Police Unit.

        1. Definition and Purpose.
            a. "Agency Shop" means an arrangement that requires an employee, as a condition of continued employment, either to join POA or to pay POA a service fee or agency fee  in  an  amount  not  to  exceed  the  standard initiation fee, periodic  dues,  and  general  assessments  of POA.  This MOU is intended to be consistent with and conform to the  provisions  of  the MMBA and the PERB Regulations relating to agency fee agreements.

            b. City and  POA mutually  understand and agree that all affected employees have the right to join or not join POA. It is the purpose of this Article to establish fair and equitable procedures for  the  implementation  of  any Agency Shop arrangement and to protect the rights and privileges of the employees, POA, and City.

        2. Employee and POA Rights and Responsibilities.

            a. Employees' Responsibilities.

Within thirty (30) days of their employment  by  City  or  mailing  of  the initial Hudson letter in a bargaining unit covered by an Agency Shop arrangement, all employees (except management employees pursuant to Government Code 3502.5(e)) will have the choice of either becoming a member of POA, or of being a non-member and paying an agency fee or conscientious objector fee.  City will notify POA within forty-five  (45) days of the identity of these  new  employees.  Members  of  the  Police Management Unit are not subject to the agency fee provision pursuant to Government Code Section 3502.5 (e).

                1) Employee's Right To Conscientious Objections.

                    a) An employee  who is a member of a bona fide religion, body, or sect that has historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially supporting public employee organizations will not be required to join or financially support any public  employee organization as a condition of employment. The employee will be required, in lieu of periodic dues, initiation  fees,  or  agency fees,  to pay sums equal to the dues, initiation fees or agency fees, to a nonreligious, nonlabor charitable fund exempt from taxation under Section 50l(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, chosen by  the employee from a list designated by Section 2(a)(ii) of this MOU.

                    b) Declaration of or applications for religious exemption, with supporting documentation, will be submitted to POA and will be processed promptly. If the application for religious exemption is challenged by POA, the deduction to the designated charity will commence but will be held in escrow by POA pending POA's
resolution of the challenge. Charitable contributions made  by employees who are  eligible conscientious  objectors  as  a  substitute for the payment of dues or an agency fee will be made by regular payroll deduction or by proof of payments  to a  nonreligious,  non­ labor charitable fund on a monthly basis to POA as a condition of continued exemption from the requirement of financial  support  to POA.

                2) Designation of Nonreligious, Nonlabor Charitable Funds.

                    a) Employees who are eligible conscientious objectors as described in Section A.2.(a)(l) must designate one of the following nonreligious, non-labor charitable  funds to which his  or  her  contributions  in  lieu of dues or agency fees will be paid:

                        i. Wounded Warrior Project
                        ii. Nice Guys San Diego
                        iii. Susan G. Komen for the Cure


            b. POA's Responsibilities.

                1) Notice to City of Dues and Agency Fees. POA will provide a biweekly transmittal file detailing  by employee  the  amount of dues and  agency fees to be deducted.

                2) Notice to Fee Payers.

                    a) In accordance with state law and regulations, including PERE Regulation 32992, POA must provide agency fee payers an annual explanation of what the fee is used for and sufficient financial information to enable the agency fee payer to determine the appropriateness of the fee (Hudson Notice). POA must provide agency fee payers a reasonably prompt opportunity to challenge the amount of the fee before an impartial decision maker, not chosen by POA, and must provide an escrow account to hold amounts in dispute while challenges are pending.

                    b) POA will provide City copies of its Hudson Notice concurrently with POA's distribution to agency fee payers.

                3) Notice of Employees.

                    a) POA will provide newly hired employees in the Police Unit with an authorization notice advising them that all unit members must join POA, pay an agency fee to POA, or execute a written declaration
setting forth a bona fide religious exemption from this requirement. The notice will include a form for the employee's signature authorizing payroll deduction of POA dues, or an agency fee, or a charitable contribution equal to the agency fee. Affected employees will have thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of this notice and  authorization to fully execute and return it to POA.   If the employee fails to execute the form, the agency fee will be deducted from the employee's paycheck.

                    b) POA will provide City copies of the  authorization  notice each time it is changed, but no less frequently than with the  delivery of its annual Hudson Notice.

    B. Police Management Unit.

        1. Since the MMBA (Government Code section 3502.5(e)) prohibits requiring management employees to pay an  agency fee, Lieutenants and Captains are not required to do so but may continue to authorize voluntary dues deduction.

        2. Dues will be for a specified amount and will be made only upon the voluntary written authorization of employees in the Police Management Unit. The authorization or cancellation of fees will be made upon clearly marked cards provided from the employee to POA.

    C. Deductions/Remittance of Dues and Fees.

        1. POA voluntary dues or agency fees will be deducted by City from the salaries of employees over twenty six (26) pay periods subject to Section VI (B) of the Employee-Employer Relations Policy. Payment of voluntary dues or agency fees will be by regular payroll deductions only. Remittance of the aggregate amount of all voluntary dues and agency fees will be made to POA by City bi­ weekly at the conclusion of each pay period in which dues and agency fees and deductions were made. Remittances will be made by City and sent to:

San Diego Police Officers Association 8388 Vickers Street
San Diego, CA 92111

        2. If an improper deduction is made, upon proof of the improper deduction, POA will promptly refund the full amount  directly  to  the  employee.  Dues deductions, once initiated, will continue until the employee's authorization is revoked in writing by the employee. An employee may only revoke a dues deduction authorization by delivering the written notice of revocation to POA.
        3. Sufficiency of Employee's Earnings: The employee's  earnings  must  be sufficient, after all other legally required  but  not  voluntary  deductions,  are made  to cover  the  amount of the  dues or fees authorized.   When an  employee is  in  an  unpaid  status for an  entire  pay period,  no withholding  will be  made to cover that pay period from future earnings  nor will the  employee  deposit (with City) the amount that  would  have  been withheld if the  employee  had been in a pay status during that period.   In  the  case of an  employee  who is  in an unpaid status during part of a  pay period,  whose  salary is insufficient  to cover the full withholding, no deduction will  be  made.  All  other  legally required deductions, including health care deductions,  will have priority over dues and agency fees.

    D. Notice to POA.

City will provide a biweekly census file of POA represented employees by bargaining unit to POA.

    E. Indemnification.

        1. Any dispute concerning the amount of the voluntary dues or agency service fee or the responsibilities of POA with respect to agency fee payers is not be subject to the grievance procedures contained in a comprehensive MOU between the Parties. POA will indemnify, defend and hold harmless City, its officials, representatives, and agents from and against any liability arising from any claims, demands, or other action relating to City's compliance with this Article. In addition, POA will refund to City any amounts paid to it in error after City provides POA supporting evidence of the error.

        2. In the  event that the agency fee arrangement  is terminated  by a lawful vote of the employees in the unit, a modified agency fee will be in effect for current employees for the duration of this MOU, and each person hired to fill a position in the bargaining unit will, as a condition of employment in that position, be required to become a member of POA or pay a service fee.

    F. Provisions of Law.

POA agrees to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations relating to agency fee arrangements, including California Government Code section 3502.5 and PERE Regulations sections 32990 through 32997. If any part or provision of this Article is in conflict with any federal or state laws, or is otherwise held to be invalid or unenforceable  by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, that part or provision  will  be suspended or superseded by the applicable laws and the remainder of this Article will not be affected by the stricter provision.
    G. City will not oppose POA's efforts to pursue the establishment of additional lawful benefits for its members including but not limited to affiliated institutions with all privileges and powers authorized by state and federal law.
    H. In the event of any concerted action authorized by POA which encourages employees to withhold their services to City, City Council has the right, by resolution, to immediately cease the collection and remittance of dues and other deductions to POA.   Before invoking its rights under this paragraph, City will notify POA of its intention and meet to discuss the matter if requested to do so by POA.

    I. City and POA will discuss and develop any additional terms or conditions necessary for the agency fee or voluntary dues deduction or implementation.

ARTICLE 71 USE OF CITY EMAIL
Authorized POA representatives will be permitted to use  City's  email  system subject to authorization by Department Management, for the sole purpose of directing employees to information contained on POA's website or for other matters pertaining to Employer/Employee relations.

ARTICLE 72 VOLUNTEERS
    A. City's Volunteer Program is governed by City Council Policy 300-01.

    B. A "volunteer" is defined as an individual or groups of individuals who offer themselves for some service or undertaking without being compensated pay by City.

    C. In accordance with City Policy No. 300-01, City will continue to optimize the use of volunteers where it is economically feasible, by developing volunteer opportunities throughout  City. Unless the  Parties meet and confer during the term of the MOU, volunteers are to be used only to supplement and complement the work performed by City personnel and without decreasing bargaining unit work or displacing existing City personnel.

    D. Parties understand that departments participating in City's Volunteer Program will use volunteers to perform a number of tasks necessary to support volunteer programs. Projects performed by volunteers include the following:


        1. Retired Senior Volunteer Patrol - senior citizens who perform license plate reading to recover vehicles, conduct "You Are Not Alone" checks, support schools to develop child safety fingerprint programs, provides McGruff Crime Dog Prevention programs, assist with business security surveys,  support Speed Surveys and Radar trailers and may provide support at front counters.

        2. Volunteers in Policing assist patrol, investigative, and administrative commands, speak to community groups and seniors on crime prevention and support Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design for local businesses.

        3. Crisis Interventionist volunteers respond to traumatic incidents and help console and provide guidance and run the Community Access Phone System (CAPS).

ARTICLE 74 DISCRETIONARY LEAVE
    A. During the term of this MOU, all full time employees will receive forty (40) hours of discretionary leave for use during each fiscal year of this MOU and the discretionary leave identified in this Section has no eligibility  requirements except as set forth in this Section. Three-quarter time employees will receive thirty (30) hours of discretionary leave for use during each fiscal year of this MOU. Half-time employees will receive eight (8) hours of discretionary leave for use during each fiscal year of this MOU.
    B. If an employee requests use of discretionary leave under this Article 30 days in advance and receives approval, the discretionary leave will be granted unless doing so would require backfill on overtime. Once approved, the Department will not revoke the approved discretionary leave. The Department may also authorize use of discretionary leave under this Article if an employee is sick. The  Department  is  not required to grant use of this leave when to do so would  require backfilling on overtime.  As an alternative, each employee may schedule his or her discretionary leave hours in the same manner as annual leave 1s presently scheduled pursuant to the departmental annual leave guidelines.
    C. All discretionary leave granted under this Article must be used by May 31st of each fiscal year or it will be forfeited. The discretionary  leave under this article does not have any cash value.
    D. Section C above does not amend, modify, or alter any discretionary leave that may be granted under AR 95.91 (Employee Recognition and Rewards Program).
COALITION AND
CITY OF SAN DIEGO
FY2013 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS TENTATIVE AGREEMENT

The San Diego Municipal Employees Association, lnternatlonal Association of F1re Fighters, Local 145 ("Local 145"), International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Local 911, Deputy City Attorneys Assoclat!on of San Diego and Local 127 American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees (collectively the "Coalition"), and City of San Diego ("City") have negotiated and reached a tentative agreement on certain terms for an Interim Defined Contribution (DC) Plan on August 16, 2012. Negotiations between the Coalition and City (collectively the "Parties") continue over a Permanent DC Plan.
In accordance with Ground Rule 5, the Partles agree that final approval of the tentative agreement is subject to approval of the City Council.

TERMS FOR INTERIM DC PLAN INTRODUCTION
1,	The purpose of this proposal Is to provide a means for an Interim DC Plan to be established expeditiously to accommodate the City's hiring needs without undermining the time otherwise needed for a good faith meet and confer process over the terms of a Permanent DC Plan wlth disability/death benefit features pursuant to Proposition B. Non safety employees Initially hired after July 19, 2012, who are excluded from SDCERS, wHI not participate in the 2009 40·1(a) Plan.
    2. The Parties acknowledge and agree that, by entering into this agreement on terms for an Interim DC Plan neither party is prevented from making different proposals during negotiations on the Permanent DC Plan over any aspect of the DC Plan, including the vehicle, vesting schedule for City contrlbutlons, the definition of compensation which could include a cap on eligible compensation, the death benefit, disability benefit, and/or the percentage for employer and employee contri.butions

SPSP"'H VEHICLE
    3. The SPSP-H Plan (as proposed and modified by this agreement) will be used for purposes of this Interim DC Plan. The City also agrees that any and all "reservation of City's rights" as stated in the SPSP-H Plan document, which relate to employees' rights or benefits under the Plan, is limited by the City's obligations under an agreement for an Interim DC Plan, as well as lts obligations under the MeyersmMilias Brown-Act ("MMBA").



COALITION AND ClTY OF SAN OlEGO
FY20i3 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS TENTATIVE AGREEMENT



CITY CONTRIBUTIONS
    4. Effective October 2, 2012, the City's total mandatory  contribution for each Eligible Class Employee as defined in SPSP-H Plan document Article I, section 1.15, subdivision (a)(il) will be 9.2% for non-safety employees and 11% for safety employees under the Interim DC Plan. These percentages will apply to all compensation as defined in Aiiicle I, section 1.10 of the Plan document For the purpose of this agreement, Elig[ble Class Employees excludes a[l hourly employees.

    5. The SPSP-H Plan document will also be amended to expand the definition of cornpensation to Include pay in lieu of compensatory time and pay in lieu of cycle time.

EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS
    6. Effective October 2, 2012, the total mandatory post-tax contribution for each Eligible Class Employee will be 9.2% for non-safety employees and 11% for safety employees under this Interim DC Plan. These percentages will apply to all compensation as defined in Article I, section 1.10 of the SPSP-H Plan document and as amended under paragraph 5 above.
VESTING
    7. The employee will be 100% vested at an times ln an amounts held in his or her SPSP-H account whether contributed by the employee or by the City.
DEATH/DISABILITY
    8. The City agrees that the terms of the dis8bllity/death benefit adopted in conjunction with a Permanent DC Plan will be made retroactively applicable to any Eligible Class Employee or his/her beneflciary(ies) who suffers a qualifying event during the period of time when this Interim DC Plan is In effect By this provlslon, the City agrees to extend to any such Ellgible Class Employee or beneficiary the full benefits and rights which would otherwise have been available to hlm or her had the disability/death benefit adopted in conjunction with a Permanent DC Plan been ln effect when the incident giving rise to the Eligible Glass Employee's disability or death occurs,
NO UNILATERAL CHANGES
9,		No benefits or monies received by employees may be altered by the City during this Interim DC Plan. The Parties acknowledge that negotiations are continuing over a Permanent DC Plan. After the effective date of the Permanent DC Plan the terms may change as set forth in paragraph 2.


COALITION AND CITY OF SAN DIEGO
FY2013 PROPOSITION B IMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS TENTATIVE AGREEMENT





RESERVATION OF RIGHTS

        10. Each union is participating in this proposal for an Interim DC Plan under continuing protest and objection and while expressly reserving Its claims which include but are not limited to the following: (a) Proposition 8 is unlawful as applied to represented employees due to the City's violation of the MMBA; (b) the City's insistence on altering the terms and conditions of employment for new hires due to the chaptering of Proposition 8- and after unilateral imposition of a hiring freeze. - ls unlawful because each Union has an MOU in effect, which was adopted and made final and binding by the City Councfl on June 18, 2012, and these MOUs establish the terms and conditions of employment for all new hires through June 30, 2013.

MAKE WHOLE

        11. The parties acknowledge that th!s agreement for an lnterlm DC Plan may eventually	impacted by any order or decision ln pending consolidated unfair practice cases before PERB once such order or decision becomes final after the exhaustion of all appeals under Government Code section 3509.5.



FOR THE CITY
I
we,tt4y Davls
Lead Negotiator, City of San Die




FORMEA	FOR LOCAL 145

Date	
COALITION AND CITY OF SAN DIEGO
FY2013 PROPOSITION El JMPLEMENTATION NEGOTIATIONS TENTATIVE AGREEMENT





FOR LOCAL 127	FOR LOCAL 911





FORDCAA

Date


































APPENDIX B-EXHIBITS AB. AND C TO FY 2011 SALARY ORDINANCE






















SALAR. ·   '11ABLEl

EXlp;B.I'l' A
EFFECTIVE JOLY 1,	201()
















BASE 'SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SE VICE.	Page1
    E. ffective 7 - 1 _;2010
RATE.     STEl?	BIWEERLt·	HOURLY	lWJ.'E   'STE)?	lUWEERLY	HOURLY	RATE   STEP	BiWEEKLY	l'lOURLY
,  10:1.i	A	1174.40	i4.•68	1020	A	2120.80	26.51	1'.03	A	1273.60	15.9.2
B	1 23.20	15.29	,B	2220.00	27:,75	B	1331.20	16 ·.64
C	1281.60'	16.02	(!•	2336 ,:80	2.9.21	C	13,88. 00	17,35
D	13·3.6.80	16.71	D'	2449.60 ,.	30,62	D	1456.80	18.21
E	1396. oo·	17'.45	,E	2559·.20	31,,99	E	1532.0P	19.15
1,012	:A	14S2;ao	18.16	1021	A,	2516.00	31.45	1104	A	1211..	15.14
B	.:L5i9,20	18.99	B	2,636.80	32 ..96	B	12.68 iOO	15,•85
C	1588.80	19.86	C	2762.40	34,53,	C	,1321.60	:l,;6·.52,
D	166.1.60	20.77	D	28.96.80,	- 36.2;1.	D	1387.20	1'7.34
E	1740.00	21,.75	E	·3040.80	38,.0.1	E	1458;4·0	18.23
1013	A	15911,.4,,0	19,93	1022	A	2287.20	28.59	1105	lk	142L6'0	17.77
B	1660,80	20,7/S	B	2396.80	2.9,96	B	l491.20	10:64
C	174,0,80	21.76..	C	25l1;20	31,39	C	1560.00	19,50
D	1816.00	22. 7'.0	D	2633.60	32.92	D	1•53:7..,50,	20.4'7
E	l904.•00	23,80	E	2764.00	34.55	E	1712.. ilo	21.4l
1014     A	iB32.00	22.90	1023     A	2079.20	25;99	110-6    A	2283.20	28.54
B	1915·.20  •    23 .. 94	B	2179,:;tO	27.;!l,4	B	2394.40	29,93 C		2po;i..50	;15.02	C	22$3.20	28,54		2:s12·. .a'o	::il.4.1 D	·2093.. 60	26.tl.7	D	.2394,40	29.93	D'	2626.!,1,0	32.83,
E	::i1B7.• 20	27.34	I       E	'2512,80	31.41	E	2760.0D	34.SO
1015
A
,,:;;:i;o6.,40
26.33
·1024
A
'·2!367,20
3'7.09
1;!.07
,JI.
;l.'537,60
2,0.47

B
2202:.40
2'7.53

B
'3107.20
38.84

B
i7i2•;so
21.41

er
·v
2303:20
',ll!D9,. 60
;a'B,.79
30.12

C
D
:3263';20
,342!5,60
4Q.']9
4·2.s2

C
D
1793..6'0
1884.80
22,42
23,56
1016
E
A
'2514.40,
2404. 00,
3;1.43
30.05
1025
E
A
3593..60
2696\80
44.92
33,71
1108
E
A
1974.40   •
l490.4.0  •
24.68
18  ,,63

B
2,518'.40
31.,48

'B
2824.00
35,3·0

B
1563.20'
19.54

C
D
2636..00
276,L 6ci·
32,95
34.52

·:oc
:2966,,40
31:l.5.2Q
·37.0,s
38 ,94

C
p·
1 37.60
171<>'40
2·0.. 47
21,.38
E	'2889 .60	36.12	E	'3266.40	40,83	E	1797.60	22,47
1017	A	2222.40.	2'7;73	1026.	A	.2397.60	'29'.97	1110	.A	2568. '00	:i2.10
B	232:s; iso·	29.07	B	,2514;40	31.43	·B	26$9.·60	33 .6:1 . C	2446.40'	30.SB:	C	263$.40	32,;18		C		'i)S.;31 D	25l>4.:80'	3;;;.06	D	2757 .60	34:.47		D			37.0,J
E	2684.oci	33.55	E	2898\40	36.;B•	E	3111.20	38.89
1·012     .A	2624.00'	32.80	1100	A	'2283•.20	2S:.54	1116	A	2079.20:	25•.99
B	2748,.l!O	34 ..36	.B	2394.40	·29,93.'	:a	2i79',20	27,,24
C	2884.00	36,05	,(;	'2512.8!)	31,41	C!	2283.20	· 28,.54
D	3028.00	37.85	ID	2626.40	·32.83'	D	23,94.40	29.93
E	3172,80'	39..66,	E	2760.00	34,,50	E	2512.'BO	31.4:t
10l9		A	2aoa·.oo	35.10	1102	A	1710.4-0	21.38	1117	.A	1344.oo·	l.G.1iO B	2941,GO	35',·77		B	'1797,i,o	22.47		B	14,04/80.	'17, 56
C!	30.85,60	38.57	C	1887;·20	23:.5!!	C	14:65.60	18 ,.32
D	324·0.00	40.50	D	1974.40	24,68	D	1532.80,	19.16
E	339,5.:;w	42.44	E	'2079.20	25.9!/	E	:J:6-01.60.·	:.io.92


101


,_;:.,,,    '•








....._ ..... -·....- ..	·-·   ··-·•········-·····•-".	•.. ··-  - ··---····	• - ·--···-··· ·--· ....   --·---,   .....  •••••-•••---H••·••       • ·-··--· - ··--·  ·-·   ··-     ·-·-- -·-   .....

BASE SALARY TABLE.CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page .
Effective 7 - 1 - 201O

RATE
STE!?
BIWEEKLY
HOUR!,;(
RATE
STE!?
B!WEEKL'.lr ..
·HOURLY
.RATE
STE!?
B!l'lEEKLY
HOUR!,Y
1118
A
i972,·00
24.65
1;1.37
A
1929,60
24.12
1153.

.A
2225.60
27,82

B
2063.20
25.'79

B
2024.00
25.30

B
2328..8-0
29,11

c.
;!164.80
27.:1)6

C
·2120.,00
26.,50

C
244.(Y,•OO
30.50

D
2265.60
28.;32

D
2222.40
27,·78

D
2562.40
32.03
1119
ls
A
2376,80
2806.4.0
29.71
35,08
1145
E
A
2325.60
1877,60
2Q.07
23.47

1156
E
A
2681.60
318:li:60·
33.52
39.77

B
2946.40
36.;!:!3

.fl
1970.40
24,63

B
l!342..40
41.78

C
3091.20
38.64

C
2,057.60
25.72

C
3497.60
43.72

D
3240.80
40.51

D
2148.80
26.86

D
3672.80
45,91
1122
E
A
3405,60
2118.40
42.57
26..48
1146
E
A
2251,20
2400.80
28.14
30.,01
1157
E
A
3850.40
2225.60
48.13
27-82

B
2222.40
27,·78

B
2s24:.ao
31.56

B
2328.80
.29.11

C
2;329.60
29,12

C
2645,60·
33.07

C
2440.00
30,50

D
2446,40
.30.58

D
2770.40.
34'.63

D
2562,40
32.03
1130
E
A
256a:oo
1758.40
32,10
21.'98
1147
E
A
2904.80
2445,.60
36.31
30,57
1158
E
A
2681.(>0
l.710.40
33.52
23,.38

B
1839,20
22.99

B
2560,Bi'J
32;01

B
1797,60
22.47

C
1932.'00
24.,15

C
2680.,80
33.51

C
1887.2-0·
23.59

D
202[!.80
25.36

D
2811.20
35.'14

D
1974.40
24.68
1131
E
A
212';1;,80
20:,?8,80
26,56
25..36
I
1148
i;:·
A
2942.40
2023,20
3;,.78
25.29
1159
ls '·
A
2079.20
2711.20
25.99
33.89

B
2120.. 00
26.'sci

B
21,22.40
26.53

B
2840.00
35,50

C
2231.20
27.89

C
222,3:,20
27.79

C
2972,so
37.i6

D
E
2346.,40
2458.40
29.33
30.73

D
E·
2332,00
2438.40
29.15
30.48

D E
312-0;80
3272.00
39.01
40;90
1132
A
1710,40
2l,38
1149
A
3181.60
39,77
1160
A
1296.00
,16.20

B
1797.60
22,47

B
3342,40
4:/..7.S

B
1360.80
17.01

C
1887,,10
23.59

.C
3497.60
43,72

C
1428.80
17.86

1133.
D
'E
A
1974,40
2079.20
1456.80
24.-68
25.99
18.21

1150
D E:-
A
36,2.80
3850.40
2'729.60
45'.91,
48.13
34.12

1161
D
E
A
1493·;50
1561-.60
2019.20
18,67
19.52
25.24

B,
1532.00
19,15

B
.2864.80
::!5,8,1

B
2120,80
26.51

C
.1605,60
20.07

C
3004.00,
37,55

C
2226,40
27.83

D
1679.40
20•.9i)

D
3148.80
39.3(>

D
2330..40
29,13

E
1756.80
21..96

E
3304".00
41.30

E
2440,BO
30.51
il34	A	2174.40	27.,18	1151	A	1710,40	21.38,	1162	A	2120.80	26.51
:a	2274.40	28.43	B	1797,60	22.47	B	2226'.40	21.83
C	237fi,80	.29.71	C	1887.20	23,.59	C	2330.40	29.13
D	248$.00	:31.;LO	D	1974,40	24,.68	ti	2440.80	30,51
E	2600.80	32.51	E	2079,20	25.-99	E	2560.80.	32.01
1-=!.36	A	2068,80	25.86	1152	A	2158..40	26.98	1163	A	24:35.·20	30.'!l4
B	217;1.,20	27.14	B	2264,.00	28.30	:a	2560.80	32,01
C	2281.60	'28.52	C	2379.20	29:''74	C	2676.00	33·.45
D	2392.00	:;!9.90	p	2492.00	31'.15	p	2811:.20.	35,.14
E	2512,80	31.41	E	2616,0Q	32',70	E	2940',80	36,76



102






BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFl D SERVICE	P;\ge3
Effecfi-.i:e 7= 1-.2010
fill.TE  STEF	BIWEEKLY	HOl.:IRLY.	RA'I'E   STEP	BIWESKI.Y	HOURLY	RATE   STEF	BIWEEKLY	HOUllLY
D	2219.20	27.74	D	2:1,21;.40	26,58	D	3·4bil . .cro	42.60
E	2326.40	29.08	E	:2231.20	:27-.89	E	3571..20	44.64
1165
.A
2o2i.oo
2s::l7
;ii76
A
1264.oo
15.os
1190
A
2079.,20
25.99

B
2121,:60'
26,.52

B
1:.164,80
:l,5.81

ll.
·2'179,2(1
27.24
C
D
2:ai9.. 20
2325,40'
27.71.
29.pll
,c
'D,
:1328 .80
1392., 80
1:6 .. 61
17.41
C
D
228:i.20·
2394.40
,18.54
29.93
E	2438.40.	3·0 ,:49	E	1'464,.,JlO	18.30	E	2512 .so,	:31.41
J.J.66	A	2;3.21.,60·	29.02	:l,177	A	201s.20	25.24	1191	1\.	15l'9.20	18-  S
B	2438.40	30,48	B	,2120.80	,26.5:j.,	B	1581.60	19.'.77
C	3550::;,io	31.88	,c	2226.40	27.83	C	1659.\20	20:14
D	26'80.00	33.50	D.:	2330 .4/0	29.13,	p	172 .60	;!Lf';2
E	2802,40	35.03	E	24'.IO.BO	30.51	E.	;!;81l,20.	22.(?4
116.7	A	2225.GO	27,82	1i78	A	2120.ao	.26.51	1192•    A·,	1156.00,	14.45·
ii	2328.80	29.11	B	22::16.40	27.8·3	B	1212 ..'00	15 ;,15
C	2440.(JQ.	30 ..50	C	2330.40	2.9.13	C	1270.40	15,(18
D	2562.:40	3lf.03	D	·2440.80	,.30.51	D·	1332.80	16.'66
E	.1681,60	:33.52	I	E	2560.80	32.0:L	E	n:SJG.80·	17.46

D	;.!023.20	25 ..29	D	28!1.l.20	35,14	D	1532..80	;j.9,16
E	21::IJ.2\J	26,54	E	2940.80	36.76	E	;l602.40	20 03
1i70	A	1705.. 60	21.32	11e1·	A	i;i:1,0.40.	21;'38	11.94	A	115i.'20	i'4.39
B	1792.•·00	22,40	B	1797.60	22,4'1	B	J,211,20	15.14
C	:i.Sll0.,80	23..53.:	·.ff	·1aa1.20	23.59	C	1268.00	:ts..es
D	.196!!.oo.	24,60	·D	1974,.40	24.68	ri	132·1.60	16 :s2
Ji:	2912.ao:	;.!5.91	E'	207.') ..20	25.99	E	13·gy,.20	17.3'it
1l7l	A	2019.20	i25,24	1183  MIN	251;8.00	32..10	1195	A	2370 40	29.'63
B	21.;l0 .. /30	26.51	MAX	342·2.4t1	42;78	B	2488::oo	3:1.,10
C	.2226.40	21.,i33	C	;!612,0P	32.65
D	·2;120 .'40	29•.:\-3	D	2742.40	34,28
E	244'0:.SQ	30,51	E	28130. 00	36;00
1172	A	2.1.io.,so	2.6.51	1184	iA:•	'2225.GO	27.82	•'1196	A	179.7 .60.	22.47
B	22;l6.a·4o	27.83	B	2328,80	;3.9.11,	J3	18,80,80	23.51
C	23.30.40	29.13	C	244().00	30,.50	c	19.77 .6()	24.72
D	24:40 .80	3·0,51	it	2562 ..40	3'2.03	D	2079,20	25.99
E·	2sto,-00·	3.2.. 0:t.	E	268.:t.GQ	33.,.52	E	2i7!i,20	27.24

23.•59.










-··· ·---·  _.,  ...,--   ..- ...............	. .,.  ·--··•···-··--······-    ..  -.,     ...-.....-.-·-· ·--·   ~---- ,..	.....................,   .


BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page4
Effective 7 - 1 - 201O





21.75


























E	;;l887,20	36.09	E	2296,80	28.71	E	3111.20·	38.89
1221	A	2S62..4o	:fa.03	1230	A	1664.00	20,80	1242	A·	2825.60 	35.32
.B	2681'.60	33.52	B	1740.80	21.·76	B	2959.20	36.99
C	2816.00	35.20	C	1822,40	:,2·.18	·c	3108.00	38,85

D
2953.6,0
36.92:

D
1913,60
23,92

:0
326Z.40
4Q.78

E
3094.40
38.68

E
1999,20
24.99

E
3422.40
42.78
1222
A
2079.2:0
25,99
.1231
A
25,62;.40
,32,03
1243
A
2825.GQ
35.32

B
2179;20
27,24

B
26a:J.;i,o
33.52

;B
2959,20
36,99

C
22S3,20
28.54

C
2816.00·
::)5.20

C
3108.0Q
38.85

D
2394.40
29.93

D
2953.60
36.92

D
3262..40
40,78

E
25:1.2.BO
31.41

E
3094,40.
38.68

E
3422.40
42,78


104













BASE SALARY TABLE.CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page5
Effective 7 -  1 ... 2oto• '
RAn!
SXEP
Bil'lllEKLY
l!O'ORLY
Jiii.im
S'rEP
.BilmE.ICC,Y
HOURI.,Y
nATE
STEP
B!WEEKLY
nouru:.y
1244
.A
fa47 .120
40.59
1261
A
1110,40
·13.88
12'75
A
1'158.40
21.518

B
3404. 00
42,55

B
1156,00
,14.45

B
:l.836.00
22.95

c
5_72, 80
44.(;6

C
1204.00
,15.05

C
1931,)lO
24 ..14

b
3751.20
,;l6;89'

D
1261,60
15,·7'7

•.l)
2030..40
25.38

,E
3932.BO
49.il'i

E
1312.80
16.41

•E
Zi26 •.40
26,58.
l.246
;l\.
1151.2.0
i4.3Q
1262
A
1222:4.0
15.28
12'76
A
2019.20
25.24

B
'1211.20
15.14

B.
l.2'74.l.lff
15-93

B
212(!.80
26,51

•¢
:1268. 00
15;.s·5

C
1;!21,.60
'16.52

C
222.6,40
27.83

D
1221-so
16'.52,

Jj'
1388,80
17.36

.D
2330.40
29..13

1249
E
:ti:
138'7.20
1975.:lO
17•.34,
24.69

1264
E' A
144'7.20
17Q6 .4-0
18,09
21,33

1277.
E
:A
2440,80
2120.ao
30.51, ...
26,si

B'
20'7.4.40
25.• 93.

B
1791..20
22-39

.B
2226 ,40
27,83

C
2178.4•0
,27..23,

c
1872,.00
23>1:!0

C
2;3.30.. 40
29.:l.3

D
22'!i7 .'20
,JB,59

D
195,2,80
24,41

j)
2440.80.
3.0.,,51

ls
:24-0i.60
·3cL02

E
2046.40
;t5,58·

E
2560.80
32..01
12s.o
A
1716.80
2.l..46
1265
A
144,9.60
18.12
1278
A
26.G4. 80
,,33.•'31

B
1797.,60
22.47

B.
l519.20
18.99

B
2800i00
35.0o.

C D
l i'88, DO
1974.4d
2:f.60
24,6'8

I:!
,D
lSJICl.. 40
:!.6.60.00'
J.9.88
20.75'

C
D
2935.20
3077.,,60
36.69
38.47

:E:·
2079.20
25.• 99

.E
•17,1t'.2(i
2:l.69

E
3225.60
40,32
·1253
A
;2764.00
34..5·5
12ok
A
,l67.,r.ao·
20.9:t
1279
A
Z95J3.,40
36.98

B
,2895.•.20
'.36.19

B
1743.20•
2:l...79

B
3:LlDi'.40
.3a·.aa

C
303$,20
3.7 :99

C
·lll27.•2o
,22. 84

.c
3252..00
4p.,55·.

D
:3i8 Urn
3if.86

.D·
;t904.Sd
23·.81

D
34i-...40
42.68

E
·3349 .oo
-i:'Lss

l\:'
199.6 .oo
.2•\!:-'95.

E
3577,60
4,4.72
J.255
A
:l.211.2.0
:115.14
1267
A
if/40;()p
23·.'IJO
12!10
A
3,281. 6Q
l(f. 02

·B
1,268,.Jlo
15,85

B
J.917.60
23.,97

B
1336.80
16•.71

C
132:l.,·60
lfi ,52

C
201i,20
25.• 3t4

C
1396.00
i?.45

D
1:387, 0
:l.7.34

·D,
;ill()0,80
26;2,6

D
1457.60
18,22

E
. 1459;40•
18.;;13

,E
2196.80
27.46

E
1525,60
19.07
1256
'11,
•i268,00
15.85
1'268
A
121-1.20
lS,:J,4
128.2
A
1888.SO
2:3.·61

B
1322,40
1!L53

B
12Ii8,oo
l!? ,llS

B
1979.20
;a4.,71,

C
:12387 .:::o
17.34

C
1321.,60
:!;6.52

C
2077,60
25. 7

'D
1'4!>8·..4o
.,iB.23

·D
.138-7 ,20
17 .3.4

D
2171 20
27 .l4

E
153'1.,20
l9.l.4

E
145.8:,40
18,23

E
2288..00
2$.60
1257
A
·.;L455.20
lll,1$
1273
A
2379,20
29.74
1283
A
3.4·;90 .40
18.63

·:s
1525.60
19..07

B
2498.40
31.23

B
1560.()0
1:9.50

.C
1596,.00
19,95

C
26;!.'6.llO
32.71

C
1637.60
20.4:7

ri
i6'17,(ib
20.97

D
2742.-i!,0
3·4,28

D
1712.80
2:l..41

E
11,;o·..a.o
22.01

E
2.076.80
35,.96

E
:l.79:3.. 60
·22.4,2
.1260
A
937,.6.0
11.72
1274
A
15.29.60
19,12
1Z85
A
1395.20.
17,1(14

B
!l72•,.QO
B1.i:S

B
1598.40
19,98

B
1457.60
18,.22

ci
:1016.QCJ
:l.2.70

C
1617,60
'20:.97

C
1526.40
19•.08.

lJ
1062.40
l.3.28

D
17.58.40
.,l:1..98

D
160 .40
20,03

E
1110.4;0
;L3 ..88

E
,1836..00
:22.ss.

E
1681.60
:ii.,02


105

-           ,........ ,,..;1,,,._•..,;;,,;,,,,,,,,:.=,;,;. ;-  .;.,,.










BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page6
Effective 7 - 1 - 2010











c	2082.40	2,6.03	C	1455:20	10·,19	C	1660.00	20.75
D	2185 60	27.32	D	1559.;lO	19.49	·n	1757.60	21.97
E	2291.20	.28.64,	E	1663,20	20.79	])!	1855.20	23.19
1293	A	1671,20	20.89	1309	A	",1559;2.o	19.49	1318	A	1112.00	14.65
B	1744.00	21.80	B	1663..:rn	20.79	;B	1269.60	15.87
C	1828.00	22..85	C	1767,20	22,09	C	1367.20	17,09
D	1911.20	23;89	D	·1an.20	23,39	D	1464.80	lB,31
E	2003.20	25,04	E	1975.20	24,69	E	1562.40	19.53
1296	A	2086..40	26.08	1310	1i.	1146.40	:l:4,3:;l	1319	A	1464.80	18,3,l
B.	2l!l7.20	27.34	B	1242.4.0	15.53,	B	1562.40	19.53
C	22.94·.40	28.68	C	1337.60	16.?2	C	1660,00	20,.75
D	2406.40	30,.0B	D	1433.·6·o	1'7.92	D	17.57,60	21 97
E.	·252Q.00	31.50	E	1528.80	19.11	'E	1855,20	23,19
1302	A	1100.0-0,	1$,75 •	1311	A	1433,.60	17,92	1320	A	1217.60	15,.22
B	1191.20·	14.89	B	1528.80	19.11.	B	1316,4·0	16.48
C	1283,.. 20·	16..04	1624.80	20,31,	C	1420.00	17,75
1374.40	17.:).l;l	D	1720.00	21.50	D	1521.60	19.02.
E	1557.60	19,47	E	1816,00	22.70	E.	1623.20	20.29
1303	A	1191.,20	14.89	1312	ii.	;t2'47.20	l!'i.Sll	1321	A	152.1.60	19.02
B	1:i!83..20	l.6.04	B	1351.. 2.0	16.89	:B	1(;23.2.0 	20.29
C	1374.40	17.l.8	C	1455.20	18,19	C	1724.80	21.56
Jj	1557.60	19.47	D	1559.20	19,49	D	1825.60,	22.82
E	1'740.80	21.76	E	1!56,$..20	20,'l!;i	E	·1927..20	24.09
1304	A	12"1,7.20	15.59	131;;!	A	1559.• 20	19..49	1322  ..A	1247...20 	15.5'9
B	13'51.20	:).6.89	·B	J.663.20	20.79	B	·1351.20	;l.6.89
C	1455.20	18.19	C	:1.767.20	22,09	C	, 1455.20	18.19
D	1559 .20	19.49	Jj	1871.20	23,39·	D	1559,20	:l,9,.49
:m	1663.20	20.'79	E	1975.2.0	24,69	E	1663,20	20.79
, .. ...,., . :,.,
···•··· .......,..-.  _,_,.,           ,         ..----- ·-······-··---- ·-   ........_._.,.  ,... 	.,  ...·-    ------- ··-··-	.,.  --··-----·---······•
106











BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED Sl:RVICE	i>ag137
Effective 7-1-2010

RATE
STE
BIYIEEKI,Y
ll:OORIIY
iiATm'
.$TJ11P
B):WEEKLY
lIOURL':C
RA.Tl>
STEP
BI!i'EliiKLY
HoiJRl:;Y
1323
A
:15,59.,20
19,-4;9
1333'
A
191:Loo
23.90
1342'
A
iss2..40
2:I.,(f3

:s
1663,20
,:W.79·

B
2004',, 80•
25.06

B
1768.00
22•.;t.o

C
1767.20
22.09'

C
'20i'7 .'60
26 ...22

,c
1850 ..40
23,l3

D
,187;1..20
2;3,39

n·
2207.20
27.,59

i:i
1943.20
24_,2!)

E
'1975.,20
24,,69•

El
,,2310, 4,0•
28·,88

r:Jii.
2036,.00
25.45
13,24
A
:1172.00
·14.65,
1334·
A
:J,268.po
15.85
1343
A
,2036.00
25'.45

:a,
:120/l.'6,0
•15•.8'.7

Ti,,
;1322.40'
1.6;$3

13'
2136.00
26.7q

t!·
13-67 .20
17.09

c•
1387',20'
17,34

C
223'7.60
27.97

D
1464.80
18.31

D
145ll.40·
18 .. 23

D
:;i344.,oo
29.30

.Ji:,
156:2,,:10
1!1-53

E
,1531,20
19.14·

E.
2462,40
30.78
1325
A
14,64 •.!3'0
18.·31
l335
A
l146,40
:t.4,33
13·44
A
2568.00
3:l,;1.0

B
1562.40
1'9.53

B
l242..:IJ;O'
15.,53

B
268.9.60
33,62

C
,1660.00
2'0,75

C
1337.60
16,72

C
28.24•.80
35.31

D
1757.60
21.97

D
1433.60
l:'7.92

D
2967.20
37.09

E
1'855.20
23.j,9

E
1624.80
20.. 31

E
3111,20
38,89
1326
A
:);398,4,0
17,4·8
:L336
A
1242,40
15.53
1346
.A
2953.60
3'6.92

B
1S14..40
;!:8,9.3

B
1337.60
16:n

B
3'094,.40
38.'6'8

·C
lusi.20
20,39

C
·1433'. 60
l7.92

C
3248 ,s'o
40,61

D
1748,<i.D
21..85

·D
:!-'624,.B0
20:31

D
3408 .oo
42,60

E
1,980. 8()
24,.76
I
E
lS:J:6:. 00
22 ..'7.d

E
3571,20
' ,64
1327
A
15,14,40
18.93
1337
A
10<1s,..i;o
13.07
1347.,
A
21ft. q
2'7.02

B
1631.20
2.0.39

,:B
1132,80
14.:L6

B
2,2.69. 60
.2'(l,37

:c
1748 00
21.BS

C
1220·. oo
15,'25

C
2380.00
29.75

I>
19,80 80'
2,4.76

D
13'07.20
16.34

'I:i
2493. (fo
31.17

Ji:
22i3.60
27,67

E
1480.80
18,51

E
.2i,12.so
32',66
1329
A
1364.'00
17.05
1338,
A
113:2,80
;1.4,1<5
1348
A
2979,20
2s·.99

B,
1477.60
18.47

B
l:220.00
15.25

B
2179,.20
27.24

C:
1591..20
1.9.89

C
'13.07.,20
16.·34

C
22'83.20
2lL54

D
1705,60
'l!:I,.32

D
14S:o,ied
'18',•,·51

;o
23,9,4,40
29.93

E',
181.9.20
:22.74'

lll
1655.20
20·,69

E
2512i80
31.41
1330,
A B C
D
1211.20
126'.8,0.0
1321,,60
1387.20
'15,14
,  15.85
16.52
l7a34
i33!:I
,A
B
C'
D
170!5.60 is:1.9,20
1)132.8'0
204.6..40
21,,'32
;::'rt
25.,58
134!:l
A:
B
C D
2283,20
239'4,,40
.;is12••.iio
2626;4(l
28.54
29.93
3·1.41
32.83

:E
1458.40
;L:8.23

E
2160.00
27.!)0

E
,276Q.,'00
34;'50
1331
A
1$45.6{)
19.3.2
13'40
A
,14211 0
,,17.'17
1:350
A
2951.20
36,89

B
1.620.00
20.25

B
i:'l,9l..20
18,'6.4

:i3,
3092;'00
3'!1.65

C
1692,100.
21.is

C
11360.0.0
19.50

C
3246.40
<i'0,5'8

D
1'.]$Q.80
22,26

D
;;'163'.7 ,60
20.47

D
3405,60
42.5'7

E
118,66,.4/J
:l:3,33

E
:t.712.80
,'21.43.

E
3572.80
44,66
1332
A
1'738..40
21."73
134:t.
A
121:1.. 20
iS.14
,1351
A
1710.40
21,38

B
11)1,9 .;;fo·
22.74

B
1261!,00,
:I:5.8'5

B'
1'797...60
22·,47

.c
D
19.0'.7',.20
2.005.60
23.84
25.0'1

C
D.
1321.60.
13fl7.20
1iq;2 17.,.,34

C D
1887,;20
1974,40
23.',59
i4;68,

E
;!098·,}fo
26.23

,E
1458.40
18,:l3

E.'
2079'.20
25,99

107


-  +,-.,.£>,......,,....-    ...,,.......,,.....,,,,•. ,  ......  ... """''""''"""''",,:J.,,_  ...,-· .....,	0·,o-cw·...,,,.....    •...............







... . -----. ·----- ·---·······• - .......	....... . • ·--- ·-··· - -··~-···


BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Pa908
Effective 7 -1 - 201o
•

-ID\.TE	STEJI,	BJ:WEElKLY	HOURLY	nATE      STEP	BIW)IBKL,Y '  HOURLY	RATE   S'J;'E!'	BIWEElKLY	HOURLY
1352	A	2079.20	25._99	13-64	A	2079.20	;l5.9.9	1373	:A	1833,.60	;l2.92
B	2179,.20	27.24	B	_2119.;rn	27.24	B	1913,60.	23.92
C	2283.20	28.54	C	2283.20	28.54	C	2004.80	25.06
D	23.94.40	29.93.	D	23.94.40	29.93	D	20.S4,.80"	26.06
E	2512.80	31.41	E	2512.80	31.41	E	2188.00	27.35
1353	A	2$94.,!;0	29;93	136S	A	2283.20	28.54	137<1	A	1793.60	22.42
B	2512,$0	3:l,.41	B	2394,4,D	29;.93	B	1884.80	23.56
C	2626.40	32,83	C	251.2.80	31,41	C	1973,60	24.67
D	21'6□,.o·o	34.50	D	2626,40	32.83	l)	201:a.ao	2S.9:\.
E	2895.20	36.19	E	2?60,00	34.-.50	E	2175,20	27.19
1354	A	2568..00	32.10	1366 ,A	2568..00	32.10	1375	A	2118."40	26.48
B	2689.60	33,62.	B	2689.60	33.62	B	2222.40	27 78
C	2824iBO	35.,31	C	:2824·.ao	35.31	'C	23:29.60	29.12
D	2967.20	37.0$1	D	29(i7.20	37.09	D	2446.40	30,58
B	311-t.20	38,89	E	3111,.20	38.89	E	2568.00	32.10
3'355	A	.268'3.20	33.54	1367	A	1.174.40	14,G8	1376	A	23_33.60_	29.17
B	2812.00	35.15	B	1223.20	15.29	B	2448,00	30.60
C	294.9.60	36 ..S:7-	C	1281.6-0	;16.02	C	2567.20	3_2.-09
D	3091.20	38.64	D	1336.BO	16.71	D	2695.20	33,69
E	3244.00	40.5-5	E	i396'.00	17.45	E	2827.20	35.34
1356	A	1432.00	17._90	1368	A	1594.40	19,93	1377	A	1507.20	18.84
B	1500.00	18,75	B	1660.80	20.'76	B	1sso.·oo	19.75
C	15.76.00	19.70	C	1740.80	21.76	C	1659;20	20.74
D	1645,60	20.57	D	1816..00	22-,70	D	1735.20	2;t.69
E	1723.20	-2:L.54	E	1904.00	23.80	E	1812.80	22.66
'1357	A	1649.60	20;62	1369	1\.	10·32.00	22.-90	1H8	A	2564.80	32.06
B	l.7,23.20	'21.5.4	B	1915.2Q	23.94	l3	2688..,80	,33.'61"
C	11,i"l.1.20	22.64	C	200],.60'	'25..0;l	C	2824.80	35.31
D	lS88,_Bo	23.61	D	2093·,60	26.17	D	2960,00	3i.oo
E	1974;4'0	24.68	E	2187.20	27..34	E	3110.40	38,SB
1361	A	1654.40	20.68	l,370	A	2106.40	26.33	1379	A	1387.20	17.34
B	1732.00	21.65	B	2202.40	27. 3	B	1458.40	18.23
C	1820,80	22.7fl	C	2303.20	28.79	C	153i.20	19.14
D	;l.895.20	23.69	ri	2409.60	30,12	D	1598,40	19.98
E	1988.80	24.86	E	25i4.40	31..43	E	l.673.60	20.,92
l.362	A	1.902.40	23.78	1371	A	1454,40	18.18	1381	A	15 8-40	19.98
B	1989,60	24.87	B	;1.524.00	19.05	_B	16:]B.60	20.92
C	20!13.• 60	26 .•17	C	159.-\1,.40	19.93	C	17.S5.20	:21.94
D	218'3-.20,	2'7.29	lJ	16!i0,8"0	20.76	-:l)	1836;00	22.95
E	2286.40	2a;:sa	E	1740.80	21.76	E	1932.00	2/J;.15
1363	A	1710.40	2J..38	1372	A	1672.BO_	20.91	1382	,A	1598.40	.:J,9.98
)3	1797.60	22.47	B	1743_.20	21.79	B	1673 .·60	20.92
C	1887;20	23·.59	C	1826.40	22.83	C	i755.20	21.94
p	1974.40·	24.68	l)	1904.80	23.81	D	;J.83.6 .00	·22,95
E	2079.20	25.99	E	1996_.80	24.96	E	,1932.00	.24.. 15·


108



·-•-•'  -·-·•···- -- .

.... 1.<.,co,._>.',,,,

.,,.  -·  .....,.,...,.  •• ···--- ......-      ••    ---        "--¼- -           ··-.----'-------······· ··-·· ---·- - -- •--·----- •--•··--·--···- ...........	··-· ······- .. ---····-·-··-···•·-'••'--••-···  ··----	'----· .  ·---·---···

















SASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Pagel!
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE	/lTEP	:B;IWEEICLY, .	HOURLY	. ,.,RATE   STlilP	BlWEEKLY	'EOURiiY	.... :RATE   STEP	:BIWEEKLY	HOORLY
1383



1384



1385


1386

Bc·



D	1458;40	18.23	D
..r.	'E	1531.20	19.14'	E
l3'96	A	:t'.!:55.20	l8.19	14.1-0	A
B	152'5,,60	l.9.•07
·C	1sg5·.oo	19,95	C
D	1617.60	20.97	D
E	:L760.SO	2;;1.oi	E
1397	t,,	1'710.40	21.38	1411	A
B	17Sf7,6l)	22 .•·4.7:	B
C	1887',20	23,59	C
D	1974.40	24.68	D
E	2079,20	25.99	E
13_98	A	1634'.40	0.43	1412	A
B	1711,20	21.39	.B
.c	179'3 ,60	22;112	C
D	181!'0'..:00	23.50	D
E	l'.9'.tt.oo	24.65	E
1399	A	1793.60	22,42	141.3	A
)l	16.88..00·	23.60	B
C	1974.40	24.68	C
D	2-06.6.40	29.83	I)
E	2'.1.67•,2.0	27.09	E













- -·· --··. -·--··· ..	···••· •· -·-· ··- - ....


BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Pag,310
Effective 7 -1 - 2010
IDI.TE  STEP	BIWEEKLY	HOURLY	IDI.TE	STEP	·BIWEEKLY	HOURLY	RATE.   STEP	BIWEEKLY	HOllRLY
1415	A	2079.. 20	25.99	1424	A	2283,20	28.54	1435	A	2088.80 	26.11
B	2179.20	27.24	B	23!,14.40	29;93	B	219(;.80	27.46
C	2283.20	28.54	·c	2512.so:	31.41	C	2299·.20	29.74
D	2394.40	29.93	D	.2626.40	32.8.3	D	240.9.60	30.12
E	2512.80	31.41	E	2760.00	34.50	E	2525.60	31.57
1416	A	2568,00	32.10	1425	A	2950.40	36.88	1436	A	1384.•80	1·7,31
B	2689.60	33,£;2	B	3086.40	38.! 8	B	1452.00	18.15
C	2824.80	35.::l;l.	C	3237.60	40.47	C	1519.20	18.99
D	2967.20'	37.69	D	' 3392.80	42.41	D	1581.60	19.'17
E	3111.20	38.89	E	3561.60	44.52	E	1659.20	20.74
1417	A	1710.40	21.38	1426	A	2236.80	27.96	1437	A	1706.40	21.33
B	1797.60	22.47	B	2343.20	29.29	B	1791.20	22.3.9
C	1887.. 20	23.59	C	2443,20	30,54	C	1872.00	23.iO
·D	1974.,40	24.. 68	D	2562.40	32.03	D	·1952.80	24.4;1
E	2079.. 20	25,99	E	2682,'40	3 _53	E	2046..40'	25,Ej8
1418	A	2398•.40	29,98	1427	A	2564.1;!0	3,l.Q(;i	1438	A	15l.9,20	18,99
B	2513.60	31.42	B	2689.60	33..62	B	1581.60	19.7-7
C	263'7.60	·32,97	C	2823,20	35.29	C	1659.20	20.74
D	27/;7.20	34.•59-	D	2958.40	36.98	D	1729-.60	21.62
E	2893.60	36,.17	f	E	310Q.QO	38_.75	E	1811.20	22,64-
1419	A	1386.40	17,,33	·1428	A	1s11.;w	22.64	J.439	A	1449,60	18.12
:B	1463.20	18.29	B	1900.00	23·.75	B	l.519.20	18.99
C	i525,60	l.9_.07	C	1978.40	24,73	C	l.590,40	19,.. 88'
D	l.600.80	20.01	D	2079.20	25.99.	.D	1660.00	20.75
E	l.67.3 ,60	:;!0.92	E	2174.40	27,l.B	E	i735.20	21,69
l.420	A	1631.20	20.39·	:).429	A	25(;8.()0	32.lO	1440	A	1590,40	19.sa
B	1706,40	.2'1.33	B	2589,60	33.62	B	1660,00	20,75
C	179;,,ao	22.41	C	2824.80	35,31	C	1735.20	21 69
D	1874.40	23.43	p	2967,2b	37.09	D	1816,00	22.70
E	l.%a·.oo	24.60	E	3il.1.20	38.8!!.	El	1902,40	23.78'
l.42:I.	A	2616.00	32.70	i430 A	2604.80	32.56	l44l.	A	i66S:;oo	20.85
B	2734.40	34.l.8	B	2728.80	34.11	B	1740.•80	21.76
2876.80	35.96	28.56.80	35,7l	C	1826,,40	22 83
D	301'6.80	37,7i	D	3000.80	37.51	D	1904;so	23.81
E	3158:40	39.4$	E	3150.40	39,38	l;:°	19.'92.80	24.;.9].
1422	A	1488.00	18.60	:/.43l	A	2065.60	25.82	1442	A	1829;60	22 87
15'60.00	19.. 50	B	2172,00	27.15	B	1921.60	24 02
C	1E:i37,<,0	20.47	C	2276. 00	28.45	C	2021.60	25.27
D	1708,80	21.36	D	2383,20	29.79	D	2103;:20	26.29
E	11n ..2.o	22 .. 39	E	2498.40	31.23'	E	2,112.80	',2.7.1)6
1423	A	l.708,80	21.36	1432	A	l23L20	15.39·	l.443	1\.	18.11.20	22.64
:B	1791.20	22.3.9·	:B	l.295.20	16.·:l:9	B	1900.00	23.75
C	188.1.60	23,E\2	C	l.348·, 00	16·.85	C	1978.40	24,73.
D	l.970.40	24.63	D	1419.20	17.74	D	207S.,!O	25.99
E	2065.:60	25.82	E	1484.80	18..56	E	2174,40	21:10
110












BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page 11
Effective 7 -1 - 2010
RATE	STEP	BIIWEKT.t¥	,. HOURiiY'	RATE   STliF  . J3IWE:EKiit	B'.OtJRLY	RATE   STEJ?	BIWEEKLY	!lOlJRLY
14,44	.l\.	2065.60·	,25,82	1453	A	3:1.81,.60	39.J/7	1466	A	1855,20	23.19
B	2172,00	·,27.i5	B	3342-'.-40	41,.'78	:a	·:i.947_,20	24,34
c·	2,276.00	28--45	C	3497.:60	,43:,.,72	·2039.20	25,49
D	2383.20	29.'79	l?	36.'72-•BO	45:.91	ll	2137-'60	26,72
E	2498.40	31.23	E	3850 ..40	48.,13	E	2243.,20	28.04
1445	A	1660.. 00	.20,.7!;,	1456	A	2729.60	34:,'12	1467	j'(	li03.20	J. 3.!79
B	1'135,.;ao	'2l .•69	];l	2864',:.8:0	35;31	:\3L	1152•.0.0	14,40
C	isl6.. o'o	:fa.'io	C	3004.'00	., 37.55	C	·12-0-0.··8'0	15.Pl D	1902,40,	,23.78	D·	3l48.BO		39.36	D,		1254/40	15.68
E	19;!37.20	24.84	!El.	33-04,00	41.30	E·	1307.20	16,34
1446	ii.	170.6.40	21,33	1457	11,,	29.53.60	36.92	14'68	A	1221,60	15.  7
B·	1791,20	!22·.39,.,	B	,3094,.,40	38/6ll	B	1270,40	15,88
C	1812.00	'23,40	C	3248.ao	40,61	,c	13:;12.:00	16.65
Ii	·:!.!:is:,i,8p	24.41	D	.3408, 00	42.60	D	1389,60	17.37
E	2046.40	2s.t;a	El	3571;-20	44 '54	E	1452 80	ijl.16
;l.447	A.	1835.-20	:.22 ..94	1458	.A	2368 ..80	29',61	1469'	A	1332.00	16.65
Ic!,	19120,00	•24 ..00	I!	2491.:;rn	31,.14	B	138,9,60 	17.37
-2004.,8'0	25.-06	C	2598.-40	3204B	·C	1452,80	18,16
2098,40•	26.23	:b	2732.00	34,15	D	1514,40	18.93
E	2l9B.40	27.48	l	E	2864 ..00	35,80	E	15fl6.4.0	1,9.:S3
144.8	A	1933.60	24,17	1461    'A	1'506 .40	1·8,,83	1470	A	1454,40	18.18
B	20,=1,9,20'	·25.. 24	Ii	1576.80	l;i,'tL	B'	1524,00	19.05
C	:,'1;a_o.8p	,,2·p'.5l	C	,1658..40	2P,?3	C·	'·1596,80	;J.IJ •. 96 D	-22211.80	27,86	D	1738.40	21.V,3	b		1673.60	20.92
E	02:3.35.20	.29.19	E	1812.00	22,65	E	1749,6.0 	21.87
1449	A	l'16D.OO	:1,4_5·0	1462	A	20;c)O ,0.D	.25 .25	1474	A	2.02.0 ..oo	25.25
'l;l.	:t2l2.130	15.16	B	2114-40	26.43	B'	211it. io	26,43
1-272.80	:15,91	C	.2225..60	'27.82	C	2225.60	27,)l2
Ii	1315.20'	16-44	i:>	:2332,80	29.;(6	D,	233:a;ao	29,16
E	i3ao.oo·	'17.25	E	24.37.,60	'·30•..47	E	2437 .,60	3·.0.47
1450	A	1407.20.	i7.!39	.1463	A	:11;87.20	14,,84	1475	A	23.68.,80	2  .61
B	141,a'.80	18.36	B	;1242..40	15.53	B	2491.20	31.14
C	:1536.00'	1,9.20	d	13()8.00	16;35	c.	25,98,4Q	32.4
D	:160$,60	20.07	D	;13'73,60	11.17	D	2732.00	3·4.15
E	16'77.60	2.0.97	E	1432,80	17',91	E	2864.00.	3.5.80



Ii:	1816,.00	22,.70	E	,"1915.,20	23·•.94	E	:po4•.oo	41,30
1452	11'.	1315•.20	'16.44	1465	1i.	1243,.20	;J.5 . .54	1480	iA	1151.,20	14.39
$	12ao. oo·	17,25"	,B	.1304.80	16-.31	B	i2ll.20	isoci-4
·:i.440··.. oo	;1.8.00	(i	1371,20	17.14,	C	12;;a;-00	15.85
:b	1504.80	18.81	D	1430.40	17,88	D	132:\,,60	16.52
E	:l.576,QO	':I.9,.-70	E	:14::JG.BO	18.71	E	1387,20	'17,34

111

-----..,-,-...,  ......







- ··-·---···"·"··	·---····-- ..,..,.--..·,-·-·---··-······· - . ·· -··-·•., ...	........,--·--·--·-·-·•-..


BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page12
Effective 7 -1.,... 2010
RATE S'l'E!'	BIWEEKLY	. HOORLY	ll.ATE  STE!'	ll:CWEEKLY	HOURI.Y	RATE   STEP BIWEEKiil!'	HOURI.Y
1481	A	1329,60	··16,62	1507	A	1729;6()	2:l,.62	1518	A	1824.QO	22.80
'.B	l BS,00	17.35	'.B	, 18:J;1,2Q	22,64	'.B	1922.40	24.03
C	1453.60	18.17	·C	1906.40	2;:i;as	·c	2004.00	25.05
D	1'520.80	19•,,0l	D	1998.40	24 98	D	209",00	26.20
E	15..96'.80	19'..96	E	2088.00	26.lll	E	2202.40 	27.53
14,82	A	1174.40	14,68	1508	A	1454.40	18.18.	1520	A	1636,00	20.45
B	1223.20	15.29	B	1524:.00	19.05	B	1715,.20	,;U.44
C	1281..60	16.02	C	1594.4.(J	19,93	C	1798.·40	22  ,48





























112












BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page 13
Effective 7 -1 -'2010
RATE   STEl?	BIWEEIBLY	EOUR.t.Y	RATE   STEP	BIWEEKI,Y	HOURLY	WITE      S'l'EP	BIWEli:KLY	EOllRiiY
1530	A	'16.34.40	:?0,43	1546	A	,;1923 ,2.0·	24,.04	1562	11,	19:n.'20	24.,,04·
B,	1711.20	21,·39	B	'2019.20	,Hf.24	B	201S.'i.JO	25.24
C	,1793,60	22;42	C	2120.00,	'2ti,!.i0	C·	.212-0,00	2<L5o
D	;1880. 00	·23.:50	D	2225,60,	'27,_82·	n.	2:?25.60,	27.82
E	i9'72,00	24.65	E	2328 ,BO·	29 ..11.	B	:'\328,80	2,9.,11
1531	A	1104.80	13.-91	1552·	A	:1923,.20,	.24,.04	156,3	,A	1603;20	20.-04
B	1155.20	:1,,i.(1.4:	B	2019 .20,	25.2/l,	B	1676.,00	2.0.95·
9	120.9;60	15.12	C	·2120.. 00:	26,50'	C:	1756.80	21.9.6
D	126ti.80	lS/86	D	2225,60	27-,82·	D	1844.CiO	23.-05
El	133,2. (}0	il.6,65	E	'2328 ;so	·:il9',11	E	:).932/80	24,16
1532	A	1234.40	·15;43	1555	A.	1488 .oo.	;l,8,60,	1564	A	J.490 .·40	ll).,63
B	1297;60	16.22-.	'B	:1560 .oo:	19.50	B	1563.-20	1:9/54
G	1354,40	'16.93:	1637.60	20,.47	'C	163,7-.60	20.47
D	14;;!.8.00	17 .. 85	D	,170.• 8.P,	21.36	D	'1710.40,	21,.38
E	1492.80	-1 ,.66	'E	1791.,·20	22 •.39	E	1797,60	22.47
1533	A	1752.80	21.91	1556	A	'2951,:ao:	36";·89	1565	A	958.40	11,9.8
B	1814-00	-23.'05	B	'3092.00,	'38.,65	B	1.004'.:QO	12.55
c	:J,925.,60	24.07	C	3246.40	-40-,;5$.'	C	1056. 0,0	µ.:rn
D'	.. 2023.20	21if"29	j)	i405.60	·42.57	D	1104\80	13.81
l!i	:2-118,'\lO	26.48	E	3'572,80,	,l.l4,.66	E	1155,20''	;l:-L44.
'.l535	A	1151.20	'14.39,	:(557	A	:1668 .oo·	·3:1,.:i.O	1$68	A	1281,60	1ij;-Oll:
B	'1211.20	15,14'	)3	2689.60'	33'.·62'	B	1336..!W	16.71
C	1268.00	15.BS·	C	2824.80:	;35.31"	.C	1396.00	r(.45
D	i2::i1.l'io	1,5;52	.p	2967.20:	37.09,	D	1457.60	:t,s;22
E	1387.'20	17.34	E	31:ll.2<i:	38,89	E'	1525.60	19,,07
1'536	A	1268,00	:u,.as	1558	'A	2079.20'	ns·.g]i	"1569	A	958.4'0'	:t;l.,,98.
B	1322.40	16.53	.B	2179020	27.24	ioos.oo	i2.60
C	13:01:•.20	17.34	.2283;20:	2$.S4	C	l'os·a.,i;(j	13.2$
))	.1458..'40	18.23	'D	2394.40:	2$.93	D:	109,8.4'0	13.'7.3
E	1531.20	-19,14	El	25,12,80	3,1.4i	E	J,lSl.20	;4,39
1538	'A	J:490.40	18 (;3	1559	·A	1710.40,	21.38	1570	A	229'.L60.	28 .67.
B	;I.;563 .20	1§.:S4	B	1797,150	22.47	B	24-03.20	3'0.,Q4
-C	1637,'60	20.47	C	161)'7.20	.23..:59	C	25:l;,-.,60	31.<1,7
D	l710AO	21.38	,D	1974.4.0	4,;68	p	2646.40	33
E·	:,;:z?.7•6<!	22.41	E	2b'1§.20	25.99	E	27.72.00	'34.65
1543	ii),	1:797-,150	22.47	1560	:A	1061.60	f3..2.'7	1571	.l\,	1668.00	20,85
B	:t.888,80	23.i'ii	B	1109.6.-0	:L3.87	B	17.46.40	-21,il3
C	i91lo.oo	24.75	C	1155.20	i4.44	c,	iiiia.:ili:J	2:.i'.86
D	20'.6Jl.80	25.86	D	1206,40	±:s:os	D	1922.!\'0	24.03
E	2l71,2P	2,7.;!.4	·,;:	1256,,80,	;l5.7:L	E	2.009.60	25.12
l544	A	:;i';:i'33 60	29,17	156.l	A	2283..20	28.54	is12	A	90.3.2:0	11.29
'2.4.48.0.0	30,60	B	ail 4;4:o	29.93	B	944.BO	11.81
C	2!;Hi7.:20	32.09	--C	2512-,80	3l.41	C	98;L.60	12,27
D	2695,20'	33.69	D	2626.:,40.	32.83	D	1-026. 40-	:J,2.$3
:E	.:i;a,21.20	35.34	'El	2760.00	34,50	E	1068.00	.13.35

113








. _.. ...
··--·--_- -  ...	--·-· ......    ---,    ..	. · ·- -· ,.,     ....


BAS!; SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page 14
Effective 7 - 1 2010
RATE   STEP	Bil'IEERLY	HOURLY	RATE STEP-	BIWEERLY	HOURLY	RATE  STEP	B!WllEKLY	HOURLY
1573
A
1828,00
    • 22.85
1585
A
2336.00
_29..20
1594
A
1334.40
1:6.68

B
1908.80
23,•86

B
2457.60
30.7.2

B
1393,60
J.7.42

C
l:999.20
24.99

C
·2S78.40
3:;!.23

C
144.9.60
18.12

i:J
20_88.80
26.11

D
2708,00
33.85

D
1519,20
18.9.9

E
218/:i,40
2_7.33

,lli
2836.80
35.46

E
1590.-40
19.88·
1575
A
1233.60
15.42
1581;;
A
·1sn.20
19.64
1595
A
i539,,20
19.24

_B
1296.80
16.21

B
,1645.60
20,57

B,
1608,80
20.11.

C
1356.00
16,95

C
1,730.40
2J.;63

C
1682.40
2·1,03

D
1425,60
17,82

D
1811.20
22.64

D
175S..40
21.98

El
14$)3.60
18.67

E
1894,40
-;{3. 8

E
1833.60
22.92
1576
A
14'93.60
18 •.G7
1587
A
3312,80
41.41
1596
A
2239.20
27.99

B
i563:·20
19;54

B
3476.80
43,46

B
2347,20
29.34

C
16:;!Q..20
20 .•.49

C
3645,60
45.57

C
2459,20
30.74

D
1715.20
21,44

D
3813,60
47.,.67

D
·2s0i,60
32.27

E
·1795;·20
22.44

E
3998,40
49,$18

.;i;:
2708,80
33.86
1577
A
1675,2.0
20.94
1588
A
.804.80
10.06
:1.597
A
1700,80
21,26

B
:l75,;l,.40
21.93

B
844.00
10.55

B
1776.00
22.20

C
1837.60
22.97

C
876,80
10,96

C
1:864.00
23.30

D
1925.60
24,07

D
923.:rn
11.54

D
194,3.20
24.29

E
2025,60 C
25.32
'
E
965.60
1:2.07

E
2032.80
25.41
.'!.'578
A
980,.00
12.25
1589
A
2752.00
34.40
1598
A
2014,40
25.18

B
1026.40
12.83

B
;i8aa.s·o
36.11

B
2112.80
26.41

C
1076.00
13.45

C
3027.20
37..84

C
221·1.20
27.64

D
,1122.40
14.03

D
3168.80
39,61

li
2320.00
29.00 •
1579
'E
,A.
B
:(180.80
if !::g·.
14.76
14.03
14.68
i590
'E
A
B
3323.20
1234,40,
1298,40
4;1.54
15,4S
1(1.23
J.599
E
A
B
2430.40
2s25·,Go
2959.20
30.38
35,32
36,99

C
'1223.,20
:LS.29

C
1360.80
17.01

C
3l08,00
$8,Q5

D
1281.60
16.02

D
1421.60
11;77

D-
3'262.40
40,78

E
133,6,80
16.71

E
1493 .60
18.67

E
3420.80
42,76
1580
A
1562,40
19,53
1591
A
i298.40
15,23
1601
A
2065.60
25.82

B
1644,80
20 6

B
1361,60
17.02

B
,2172.00
27.15

C
J..720._00
2:1,50

c
;l.422,40
1;7._78

C
2276.oo:
26.45

D
1:796.00
22.45

D
1490.40
18.63

:p
2383..20
29,79

E
1887.,20
.is ,59.

E
1560,00
19.50

E
2498.40-
Sl,23
1583
A
J,593.60
19.92
1592
A
2283.20
2e.5·4
1602
A
1774,40
22.i.a

B
i668.00
20.85

B
2399-20
29.99

B
1850..40
23.J.3

C
1748,,00
21.85

C
2513.60
3.1.42

C
1934.40
24:18

D
1836.80
22,96

D
2634.IJ,Q
3'2.93

D
2028.80
25.36

E
1920,OD
24,00

E
2759.;;w
34.49

E
2125,60
26.57
1584,
A
19:1,9.20
23.99
1593
A
1890.40.
23 .63
1603
A
2084.-00
26,05

B
2006.40
25.0S

B.
1989,60
24..87

B
2190.40
27.38

C
2106.40
26.33

C
2080.80
-26,01

C
2293.60
28•. 67

li
2+97'.f;O
';l.7.47

D
217-4,.40
:27,.l!l

D
2396.. 80
2•9;96

E
2311.20
28.89

'E
2288,00·
28.60

E
2520.80
31.·51·


114












BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	-Page15
Effective 7 -1..,.. 2010
RATE	STEP	BlWEEKLY	-nouru:.y	RATE  ··STEJ?	BlWlllERLY	E;ODRLY	RATE   STE]?	BIWEEKLY	. HOtnmY

1604	A	:.1400.80	30.01	:!:'6;15	A	2568. oo·	32.lO	1-627	.A	·1228. ao	15.,36
B	2520,80	;31'51	B	;:i689.60	33•,62	.B	1284.8-0	i6,0t>
C	2641.6·0·	a3.o,:;e	•C	2824.80,	35_ji	·C	1340. 00	16,75
D	2775,20	3:!,A;:9	D	2967;.20.	·3·7.09	D	l3'99,2Q	17.49
E	-2907 .20	36,34•		E	3111.20	38.89			E	146,4,00	ll!.$10 1605	A	1964.'()Q	24,,.55'	:i:616	A	2·osa .s·o	2.6:ii		1628	.A	i45-!!,40	18.1·8 B.	-2062,..40		25,'78		B	zi;gEi;so·	27.46		,B	1524.00		19.05
t!	2165.6b	:n.01	C	22_.99,;rn:	28.74	C	1596.80	19.9'.6
D	,2273.,60	28.42.	:d	2409,60	30..12	,D	1673.60	20	92
E	29...85,	iii	2525 .60.	·31',,s7	E	l,749.60	21· 97
1608	A'	21,33	16:J.7	4	11$1,20	14..39	1630	A	1504.00	18	80
B	'1791.·20	2:;!.39	.B	1211.20'	15·.14	B	1578,40	i9.73
C	;l.'872,00	23,.40'	:C	1268,0□:	'15,85	C	1658.40	20.·73
D	;l.952.80	24.41	D	1321.60	16.52	D	l7.3 .40	21.J;8
E	2M6.40	25',58	E	1_387 .,20	,17..34	E	1811-20	:;?2,64
1609	A	180:0:.'00	22,50.	16:L	A	17.91,20:	22;·39	1631	A.	20'79,20	.25•.9,9
:B	18ili).so	23.• 61	B	1'880.'80'	23.51	B	2179."20	27	24
C	190·0..,oo	211;75	C	1963.20	24.Sil	C	2283.20	28.54
D	;2066.,40	25.8:;l	D	2051.20	25.•64	D	2394.40	29.-93
E	2171..?0	2?,.l.4,	I	-E.	2145.60'	26.82	.E	2512.S-O	31	;\1
1'610	A	2066.. 40	2;,,83	1622,	A	23'84,BO	·Q9-.81	1632	A	:us-..so	16.06
217;!,,20	27.14	Ii	.2500.00	31.25	B	1339.20	16.:74'
c	'22?_:;? .,40	2(!_.i,3	C	2628,80	.32·..86	C	·1399,20	17,49
i:>	2390.40	29.88	D	2760.,-00	34,50	D	14,:\';:!.20	18.2.9
E	2512.80	3l.41		l!:	2sa1,20-.	36.09		·E	1529.60·	19.1·2 il.Ml	A	238<\,80	29.-81	:J,:623	A	180().00	2:;?.• so	1¼524	,A	1579.20	19.74
B	2500,00	.:!1.25	B	1888 .:80.	23,6'1	B	1657.60	20.72
C	2628,80	32.86	C	i9s.o;oo	,24..75	C	1742,40	21.111,
D	275_0.po	34.50	D	2066.11,0.	:25.8;;!	l)	1021,:20	22.84
E	288'1.20	36.09'	E	2171.20	,27,14	E	1-918.40	23.,98
1612	A	2283.20	281."54	1624	A	2066.40	:2s,s3	1635	A	1600.00•	20,.,0'0
B	! i ;:g
'29./93,	ii	2:i..71."20:	27 •.14		B	1676.'80	2.0,,·,96 311..-41	C	;;\282-_40	28.53	•C	1752,80	21,91
D	2626.40	3:i.83	D	2,390.40	29,88	D	1832.80	22,,91
E	2'760.00	.34,.50	E	25-12. 80	31.41	E	;J:921.60	24.02
1613	A,	1_?;10.40	lll_l.,38	1625	A	"'1557,60	19.47	.. 1637	A	1822.40	22.78
1797.oO	:;:2.,,47	;Ef	1626.4():	20.33	:B	1906.40	23.83'
C	;L.88:?:-,20	23,;59.	C	1702,.•40	·21.28	.c	2003.20	25,04
D	:i.974.40	-24Ai8.	D	1.7:80.i.ad	22,26	D	2103.20	26.29
E	2079.,20	25.99	E	1865..60	23.32	E	220,2,.:4,0	27.53
1614		A	20'79.2◊	25,99.	1626	A	1557.60	19,,,47	163:0	A	.2564,,.00_	32,05 B	2179·,20	27 ..24.,		:S	 is2s...:10	:ip.33		B	·2683.-20 	33.54
C	2:ai'i,s-,20	,28.54	C	1702,40	2L28	C	il819.2d	35.2<!,
D	23!J'4.40	29·;93'	D	+1eo.ao	.22,26	D	2958.40	36.98
E	25,1.2 .so	.111.-u	E	1865·,.60.	:i:3°..32	E	3096.00	ia,10
... ,,,.,,,,,.,,..,..
115












..........  ------·········· ---------  -----··-  -----



BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	PagE! 16
Effective 7 -1 - 2010
RATE	ii'l'EP	IiIWEElKLY	H01JllLY	RATE	STEll?.     BIWEEKLY	H01JllLY	RATE   STE!'	BIWEEKLY	JlQURJ:,y
1639.	A	1656.80	20.71	1649	A	1526.40	19.08	1658	A	2121.60	26.52
B	1738;40	21.73·	B	•l602.4Q.	2-0.03	B	2;u,9.20	27.74
'C	1818.i,W,	22.73	C	1676.80	20..96	C	2328.80	29.11
D	1904.·80	23.!ll.	.D	1760.80	'22.01	Jj	24·40,.00	30.  0.
E	1990,40	24.88	E	1848.$0	23.1:L	E	2556.00	31.95•
1640	A	1370 .40	17,13	1650	A	,1273 .60	28,.42	1659	A.	1678.40	20:98
B	1434.40:	.17.93	B	2386.40	29.83	B	1758.40	21.  8
C	1505.60	19,82	C	2504;.00	·.31.30	C	1844.80	23.06
D	1575.20	19.69	D	261$.40	32.73	D	,19·2.9.60	24.12
E	1648.0Q	20,60	E	2750.40	.34.,38	E	2027.20	25.34.
1641	A	1589 •. 60	19,87	1651	A	1421.60	17 ..77	1660	A	1588.00	19.85
B	:).659.20	20.74.	B	1491.20	18.•64	B	1660·.80	20.76
C	1739,20	21.7';!,	C	1560.00	19.SO	C	1737.60	21.72
181"'.40	22.68,	D	1637. 60	20.47	D	1826.40	22,·83
E	19-00;00	23.75	E	1712,80	21.41	,.  E	1906,40	23.83
1642	A	1979.20	24.74	l6$2	A	1454.40	18,18	1661	A	1914. 40
B	20'68.00	25..85	B'	1524.00	19.05	B	2015.20
C	2177.60	p.:22	C	1594.40	19.9;!	C	2095.·,ao	26.21
D	2:;)88.. 80	2.8.61	D	1660.80	20.76	D	22Ql,60	27,52
E	2398.40	29.98	E	1740.80	:21.76	E'	2308•;so	28,BG
1644	A	1517,60	;J.8.97	1653	A	1594.40	19.93	1662	A	16·37 ..60	20,47
B	1585,60	19,;;1)2	B	1660.80	20,76	'B	17.12.80	21;41
C	165,4.40	20..68	C	1740.80	:,21. 76	C	1793.60	22.42
D	1729.60	21.62	D	1816.00	22.:7.0	D	1884 ;BO	23,56
E	1809,60	22.62	E	1904.00	23.80	,E	1974AO	24.68
1645	A	1571.20	19.64	1654	A	1749.60	21.•87	1663	A	1056.QO	13.2.0
B	1645.60	20.,57	B	1829.60	22··.07	'B	·1:1,04.80	13	81
C	1725.60	21.,57.	C	1916.. 80	2.3 ..96	·C	1155';20	14.44
D	1806.40	22.58	D	2001.60	25;02	!)	1209.60	15.12
E	189Q.40	23.63	N	2093 .60	26.17	E	1258.80	15.86
1646.	A	1820,S(l	22.76	1655	A	. ;J.564.80	lS.56	1664	A	1268,80·	1S.B6
B	l!'l0,IJ..,8(l	23.81	B	1637. 60	20,47	B	1332.00·	16.65
C	1990,.49	24.• 88	C	.1720.•.00	21.50	C	1387.;20	17.34
D	2075.20	25.9'4	D	1800, oo·	22.50	p	1454,40	18.18
E	2176.80	21.21	E	1887.20	23.,59	E	1526.40	:I.9.08
11>47	A	145.6.80	18.2;!.	1656	A	1722.40	21.53	1665	A	1526·,40	19 .OB
B	1532.00	l9.15	B	1800. 00·	:'!2.. 50	B	1596·.80	19,96
C	·;J.60.7 ..20	20,09	C	1888.80.	23.61	C	1:673 ;j50	20,92
D.	1678AO	20.'9.8	D	1978.40	24;.13	D	J,756'.:80	2:t.96
E	1758.40	21.. 98	E	:;l076,80	2S,96	:&	1841..60	23.02·
1648	A	1331,20	16.64	1657	A	1934.40	24.18	1666	A	191:,16. 00	24;95
B	1388.SO	17.36	B	2027 .20	25.34	B	2091.20	26,14
C	1456,BD	18.•21	C	2124. 80	'26.56	C	2181,,-60	27,27
D	1s3.2;00	19.15•	p	·2221.20	;a7.84
'.E:	1607.20	20.0.9	E	2334.40	29.18
·:eD:
2290•.40	28.63
2396..00	29.!JS
116











BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED. SERVICE	Page 17
Effective 7-1-2010
RATE	STEP	BIWEEKLY	HOURLY	RATE.     STEP.	BJ:WE:EKLY	· HOURI,,'	RA'l'li	S t'	B:iw);)EKLY	HOURLY 16'67		A		958'4'0		·11.9fr	1678	A		1563,20		19,54	1697		A		161.;;r. 80		20,16
B	i004.00	;1.2.55	B	i637,60	20.47	B	1684.liil	21.06
C	1056,,00	13.,.20	.C	1710',40	21.38.	C	1767.20	22,09
D	1i0Lao	13.Bl	p	1797·,60	22.'4..7	D	il.857.60	23.22
E	i1s5,:20	14.44	'E	1887·,20	23 ,5)3	El	1943.20	24.29
1668	A	2169A,O	27.,.l2	1680	A	·452,LBO	56.56	16.98	A	2951'!.40	36.98
B	2283.20	28,.54	B	4730,'40	s.:q	B	31(!;!..60	38,'.77
C	2388.80	;;l/1,86	·C	4;949,,60	151.87	C	325.6.00	40,,70
D	250>.!..80	31.31	D	51'7.9 -20·	64.7;4	D	3405,60	42.57
E	·2624,.,00	32·,so	,El	,,5419·.20	67.74	E	35'76..80	44,71
1669	A	2-02.5.60	25 ..S.2	1683	.A	375 ,6Q	4i;.n	169/)
:B	21i2.·so	26.41	B	3921./iO .,,.	49.02
A·	135;;!.•00	1·6. 90
:l.425.60	17.Bia
C	'2214,40'	27,68	C	41'03'. 20	Sl.29	C	149Q.4'o	18.63
D	23;1.5 ,:20	2a .. 94	D	4:i!911,,4Q	53,613	D	156:3 ,20	W.54
E	24ll.6•. 80	30.21	44  -Sp	56.:ti'i	E	1i'i37.6b	20.47
1670	A	2424,. oo:	30.30	1684	A	2538 ;·40	31.73	1714	A	174•0.:00	21.,75
B	2 :>1.60:	31.12	B	2,6,59-20	33,,24	B	1827.20	22.84
C	2664,.'00	3'.'1.30	c	278}!'.00	3<1i.B5	C	i904,00	23.s.o
D	2792,,ao•	34.91	D	2929,.60	3.6,,,62	D	l.9,95.2.0	24,94

1671
E	2924.,80	3!5.56

1692
E	$067.20	3'8,34	E	2097,60	26.22


E	2'7,87.,20'	,34,.Ei4	E•	2287.20	28.59	E	2887,20	36."0'9
i672 A	1149. 60	2;1..a.1	169,3,      .A	2,!;l,6,80	30.21	1716	A	14:90•.40	18.'63
B	iil32·i8Q	22:,91	B	2533:,60	3:):,67	B	:LS.is.o,oo	19.50
C	:1,921.60	24,02	c	2654,,40	33,18	C	:I.637.60	20.47
D	2004.00	2S..05	D	2790.40	34;as.	iD	1709..:pO	-21.37
E	20.97.'60	;rn.22	E:	2920 :80	36-,51	·E	l.793.60	22.42
1673	A	1457.!50'	18.22	16!)4	A	;2533.60	3:l:·,67	1717	A	lll12.·00	23 ,90
B	1525.60	:19.0.'.7	,'B.	2654.40	32;is	B,	J,9'.96.0()	24.,95
C	1s!ii:4o	li:1.93	C	2790',40	34.88	,!;!	2088.80	26, ll
D	1665.60	20..82	Ii	2920,80	36 51	p	21as ,40	27.33
E	17il'O.OO	21.75	E•	3064.o.il	3(!.30	,E	2282,4.0	28.53
1675	A	18U,20	:22,64	1695	A	'2538,.4Q	31.73	1718	A	2120.80	26.51
B:	1!Hi0·. o·cr	23,75	B•	265!).2,0	33,24	.ii	2226,40	27.83
C	1978.40	24.• 73	(!'	278S ,00	34.85	c	23,30.40	29.13
Ii	20'79.20	:,l$.9!i,,	D	2929 .'6Q	36.62	ti	2440.,:So	.30."5l
:i;:,	2174.4.i>'	27.18	E	'3'01S7.20'	38.34	E	2560,.80	3·2.01
1677		2.065,60	'25.82	:1.696	A	2933,6.0	36.67	1719·	A	1331.20	16,.64• B	2:i.'n.00:	27.15		B,	2010.do	39·;49		B	i::!95,2.0	17.44,
C	.2276.00	,2-8..45	C	3226.40	40'.33	C	;I.455.,20	lt!.19
D	2383.20	,29,79	D'	3386.40	42.33'	D	1525",,60	19.07
E'	249,8.40	'3·1.23	Ji:	·;;3546.40	44.33	E	15%.80	19,96

117


--·"•'"c·,.,.,.".•,...







........ --····-···---·-	. . ·~•··-· ..  ·-·--·--· .... ..... 	


BASE SALARY rABLE CLASSIFIED .SERVICE	Page 18
Effective 7-1--'2010
RATE	STEP	BIWJ;JEKLY	:ROURLY .	RllTEl   STEP	BIWEEKLY	,:a:omu:,y	Rl\TEl	STEP	BIWEEKI,Y	HODll.LY 1720		A,		1268,00		15.B5	1730	A		1923.20		2,:li.04	1747		A		14.90.40		18;63
B	1322,40	16,l;fa	B	'2019 .20	25,24	B	1563,2Q	19,54
:c	13.87 ,.20	17.34	C	2120.00	,l6_.50	C	1637.60·	20.47
D·	1458.40	.1B.:;i3	D	2225.60	27.82	D	17:L0.40	21.38
E	1531,20	19.14	E	2328.80	29,ll	E	17.97.60	22.47
1721	A	1760.80	22.01	1732	A	1596..oo	B.95,	1748	A	1710.40	21.38
B	1841..60	23,02	B	1660.80	20.76	B	1797.60	22.47
C	1.92·0. eo	24,11	C	1741.60	2;1..77	C	1887.20	23.59
.:D	202lL80	25,36	D	1816.00	22.70	D	1974.40	24.68
E	2123,20	;5.5;54	E	1902.4;0	23.78	E	2079.20	25;99
1722	A	;t.675.20	·20,,94.	l.734	A	2000.00	25.00	1749	A	2079.20	25.9.9
B	1755:::io	21.94	B	2097.60	26..22	B	2179,20	27.24'
d	1834..40	.22.!,i3	C	2198.40	27.48	C	2283..20	28.54
D	1931.20	24.14	j)	2303 .20	28;,79	D	2394.40	29.93
E	2023;,20	25.29	E	2416,SO	30. 2-1	E	2512.80	31.41
1723	A	1756.80	.:u.96	1735	A	164/0.00	20.50	1750	A	2225.60	27.,82
B	1841.60	23.02	B	1712.80	21.41	B	2328.80	29.i1
C	1924.80	24,06	C	1795.20	22.44	C	2440.• 00	30.50
D	2025.60	25.3:2	D	1887.20	23.59	D	2562.40	32.03
E	2121,60	26.52.	/·	E	1972.8.Q	24.66	E	2681..60	33.52
1724'	A	2684.00	'.;13.55	1736	A	2198.40	27AB	1751	A	'2562.40	32.03
B	2806.40	35.08	B	2292.00	28,65	B	12681.'60	33·.52
C	2948.80.	36.86	C	'2393 .60	2$1,92	c·	2816.00	:35.20
D	3085 i60	38.. 57	p	250.0 .00	31.25	D	2953 60	36.92.
E	32°35,20	40,44	Ji:	2620.00	32.75	E	3094,:.40	38;68
1725	A	1923.2'0	24.04	1.73'1'	A	151 .20	18.99	1752	A	2953.60	36.92
B	2019,;lO	25.24	-B	1581,60.	19 ..77	:B	309¾,40	38.68
C	2i2.o.o'o	26,50.	C	1659,20	20.7:'\	C	3248.80	40.61
D	2225.60	27.82	J:J	'1729.60	21. 62	D·	3408.00	42.60
E	2328.80	29.ll	·E	1811.20	22.'64	E	35'71.20	44,64
1726	A	15'75_2·0	20. 4·'	i73B	A	1742.40	21.78	1754	A	2816.$0	35.21
B	:1754.40	2;1..93	B	'1820.80	·22.'76	B	2949.6.0	36.8.7
C	18;37.60	22_.n	C	1908.80	23.86	C	3'096, 00	38, 70
D	1925,'60	24.07	D	1988.00	;l.4.8S	D	3249;00	40.60
E	2Cl:i\5,60	25.32	E	2083;20	26.04	E	3405.60	42.57
1727	A	192.3.20	24,04	1739	A	2671.20	33.39	1756	A	2283.20	28.54
l3	2019.20	25.24	B	2805.60	35.07	Ii	2394.40	29.-93
C	2120.•oci	26.50	C	2935,20	3-6.69	C	2512.80	31  41
D	2225.60	27.82	n	3079.20	38.49	D	2626.40	32,:.83
E	23.28.BQ	29.ll	Ei	3225.60	40.32	E	2760.0Q	34.50
1728
A
2700 .'80
33.76
1746
A
1211.2.0
15.14
1757
A
2799.20
34.99

Ii
2°828.80
35 :3.6

B
1268,00
1.s,as

B
2,93·2. 80
36.66

C
2973.60
37.17

C
1321.60
16.52

C
3078,40
38.48

D
3114.40
38,;93

D
13(!'7.20
17:,34

D
3232.BO
40.41

:El
3271,iO
40.89

E
_1458.40
;1,8,23

E
3390.40
42.38


118

.    .      •••      ••-•  ....      ...          ••·•  •   ••---•••"•       •....-.        L'   .,..,_,_,,_...._••   -••••-•-•	.·-· ---    ·-·.  ·•··•··•-"'-'   .---- .,     ---· --·-·· -·-  --·    '   .	••'--•-•••     .... , ..  u•••-••••••••  •-•••••  ........-••-••••••       --••-••••••••' ••••-••-  -•••  ••
















BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page19
t;ffective 7 -1 - 2010
RA'l'E   STEP	lUWEEKLY.	HOtlRI,Y	:RATE   STEP	B:rwEEJKJ:,Y•	IlOtlll.LY	RATE   S':rEF	BIWEEKL7l	-HOU!lLY
1758
A
.:a
1268.'00·
1322.,40
15.85
1.6.53
1777·
A
B
1673 .60
,17'4. . 6.0 .
•20.92 21.87
1798
A B
2::iss.00 2395.20
28.60
29..94-

.c
1,387°.;;io
17.34

Cl
l!f;ll7 .60.
22,97

C
2516. 00
31.45

D
i458.40
18.2::)

D
1932.80
2·4.16.

D
2636.$0
32._96

E
1531.20
l!L14

:E
.2mi'1.20-
25 ..34

E
2760.00
34.50
1759
A
1-455.:20
18,.l.9
1778
A
.1387,.20
17.34
.1801
A
145!,,20
l.8.19

B
:!-5,25.-60
19,07

B
"1458.40
18.,,23

B
1s2s.1;o
19.-07

C
·1596•.:oo
19.95

·C
1$3:1,.20
;J'SJ.14

C
1596.00
19.95

'n
1677,{:;0
20.97

'·iD
1598,40
l9 •.98

Ii
1577.60
20.9·7

E
:f.760,!BO
:22, 01

ls
1673 .so:
20.92

lll
1760.80
22.01
1·762
'A
2952.80·
36.91
1783
·.?,.
2289.20
28."54
1802
A-
l.786.40
22.33

,B
3095..'20
3s.i;si

B
239}.60
29,92

B
1868;80
23.36

'C
3246 ..40
4/).58

C
2)$10 .40
31,38

C
1952,sO
24.41

D
!;!408 .·00
42.60

D
2.621:i.oo·
3ll.85

D
2038.40
25.:.i/,.8

E
3577.50
!!1,4 .. 72

E
2764.00
,34,;55

E
2137.6Q
26.72
i765
'A
1753,.60·
21.92!
1784
A
.1430.4'0
17.88
180}
A
1672.0-0
20.90

B·
18!!1.60
,23.02

B
i:503,20
18,79

li
1741.60.
21.77'

·c·
1925.60
24,07

C
.l572.80
19·._66

·c
1827.20
22.84

jj
2b.20.80·
25.26

D
652.()0
20,$5

D
1904,(m
23.,80

E
211J$.,Op
'26.-35
I
E
;;i.730,40
21.63

E
1992.00
24..90
J.7G6
A
13'is,.:io
1!/'..J,:9
1793
A
•2526.40
,32-.•83
18'04
A
2760,.00
34.50

'B
1M .oo
(\.8.1.0

l3
2760...00.
34.50

B
2887.20
36.09

C
t.Sil.3.60
18.92

a
2895,20
36/19

C
;!   3030 ,40'
3.7 .88

j;
,158:l..40
·19 ,78

D"
.3,Q39.20
,37,99,

D
3,172-.80
_39.65

E
1657,60
20.72

E
3184;•00
39;·so

E
3325.60
41.57
1767
A'
158:0. 00.
·19.75
1794
A
    • 716,ilO
8,95
1·aos
A
ll824.BO
::)5.31

B
:j:;664,00
20,eo

.B
750·,.40
9.. 38·

B
2960.,00
37·.oo

C
i,740 •.80
21.76

C•
7•9l,2Q
9..89

c:
3105.60
38.82

;o
1825.60
22.82

. JD
823.20
10.29

D
32.60. 0.0
40,75

lll
1906,40
2;3.83

lll
858 40
'10,73

:El
34·16..80
42,71
1769,
A
25.68.00
32,;LO
1795
.A
,. 2824,80
3!$.31
1806
A
29'53.60
36.92

B
26'89;60
33.62

·B
2960., Oci
3-1.00  .,

B
3094·.40
38.68
C
28.2_4.80
35.:tt.
C
3105,60
3a·;s2
C
3248.80
40,61
D
2967.-2\l
,3'7 . .(,)9
D
326!J'.OO
40,75
D
34qs.oo
42..iSO
E	:fa.1:1..20	-38,89	i;:	3416.iio	42.71	:El	3'571. 20	4'.4./;4
1.774	A	i.268.00	1s.a·s	1796	A	1529.60	fa.12	1808	A	1476•.0o	l'!l.45
<B	1322.40	;l,6.53	'.B	1600,00	20."00	'.B·	1543;20	19,29
C	1387.20·	17.34	C	1675.20	20.94	C	1610. 0	20.;l.3
,D	1-458•.40	18,23	D	1761,60	22.02	D	1681.•60	21.-02
Jil	15 1.20	19.:!;4	'.8	1839.20	,22.99	E	1761.60'	22.•02
1,7'76	A	1211:20	15.14	1797	A	154p:.oo_	20.50	1.$09_	A	. 1455.20	iil.19
B	l:.l!S'$·. 00	·15.. 85	'.B	1'712.80	.:Bl.41	B	1525,60	:l.9>01
C	1321.60	16.S!a	C	1795.20	22.44	C	15%.00	19.95
D	i3!!'1.20	17.34	D·	1887.-20	23 :!'i9	D	1677..GO	20:;97
:El	1458.4·0	18.23	E	1!372.80	24.66	ii:.	17,60.80	22.01

119







·····-··"   ....._,,_      ···--- ···-·	......,..,_     --····        ,	.,.,  . - ...


BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page20
i;ffective 7 -1 - 2010
RATE STEP	BIWEEKLY	HOURLY	AA'l'E'   STEil?	BIWEEKLY	l!OURLi!'	RATE   STEP	BIWEEKLY	HOURLY
1810	A	1011.:ao	22.64	1823	A	2:227.20	,27.84	1839	A	2294-40	28.68
B	1900.. 00:	23-75	B	2331.20	29.14	B	2399.20 	29.99
.c	1978·.,40	24.73	C	2447.20	30.59	C	2513.60	31.,42
D	2079.20	2.5.99	D	256B,00	32•. 10	D	2624.00	32 80
E	2174.40	27.18	E	26!l9,,60	33,.62	E	·2748.00	34.35
181.1	A	2240.80	28.01	l824	A	1828'.00	22.85	1840	A	13!!;7.20	17.34
J;l	2345.'50	29,32	B	1901.60	23,77	B	,1458.40	lS.23
C	2461,(>0	30 ..'77	C	1979.:W	24.74	'C	15:i!l.20	19.l.-!l,
D	2578.40	32.23	D	20(>;1..60	25.• 77	D	3;598.40,	19;98'
E	2708,80	33 86	E	2152,00	26.90	E	1673,60	20,92
1816	A	2824.BO	35,31	1825	A	1604.80	20,06	1841	A	2409.60	30,12
B	2960.00	37.00	B	1682,40	21.,03	B,	2s20.oo	31.50
C	3105.60	38,Wa	,C	1768.. 80	22.11	C	2632.00	32.,90
D	3260.00	40,75	D	'.l.850..40	23.3;3	:i)	2758,40	34.48
E	34:16.80	,:1,2.71	E	:J.9));0.80	24,26	E	2884.00	36.05
l817	A	1539.20	19.24	1826	A	1940.80	. 24.26	184,2	A·	2079.20	'25,99
B	160B.OO	,20.10	'B	2032.80	25,41	B	2179.. 20	27'.2'4
C	16132.40	_;ll..03	q	2136.00	26,70	C	2283.20	28.54
D	1760.e'O	·22.01	D	223'7.60	27.97	D	2394.40	29.93
E	1839.20	22,99	E	2347.20	29.3.4	E'	2512.80	31.41
1818	A	1734.40	2.1.f;B	1830	A	:2953.60	36;92	1844	A	:J.387.20	:J.7,34
B	1816.00	22.'70	:s	3094.40	38.68	B	l45B.,,w	18.23
C	1906.4'0	23.83	C	3248.80	40.61	C	15$1.20	19,14
'D	2004.00	25,05	D	;3408.OQ	42;50	D	1598.40	19.98
E	2098,40	26.23	E	3571.20	44.64	E	1673.60	20.92
18:J.9	A	1525.60	19.07	1832	A	1740.80	2:J..76	1849	A	2435.20	30.44
B	1596.00	19.95	B	1810.40	22,63	B	2560.80	32.01
d	:J.668'.00	20.85	C	:l.885.60	23.·57	C	2676.00	33.45
D	1742.40	'21.78·	D	:J.964.00	24c55	D	281:l..20	35.14
Ji:	'1828.oo	.22.85	l!l	.2051.20	25.64	E	2!HO.BO	36.'76
1820	A	1846.40	23.08	1833	A	1281.60	16.02	1850	A	2075.20	25.94
B	i930,40	24.13	'B	·1335.ao	,16,71	B	2167.20	27,09
C	2.024..QO	25.30	C	,13%,.00	"17,.45	C	2283.20	28·.54,
D	2.120.00	26.50	D	1457.60	18.4:;!	D	2393.60	29.92
E	2224.80	27.81	E	1525.60	19.07	E	2510.40	31.38
1821	A	l.979.20	24.74	1834	A	:i420.00	17;75	1851	A.	2760.00	34.50
B	2068.00	25.85	B	1<!!,83.. 20	18,54	B	2887.20	36.09
C	2177.60	27.22	C	1551.20	'.l.9.39	C	3030.40	S7.8.8
D	2288,80	28.61	D	1624.00	20;:30	D	3172.80	39.66
E	2398.40	'29,98	E	1698.,40	21.23	E	3325.60,	41.57
1822	A	2217,60	27.;72	1835	A	1955.20	24.44	1852	A.	1525.60'	19.07
B	2323,.20	2$).04	B	2036.80	25,46	B	1;601.·GO	20. 02
G	2432.UO	30.4:0	C	2,133.60	26;67	1673".60	20,92
D
2552.00
31.90'
D
2230..40
27.,8·0
:o
1759.20
,J.l,99
E
266$1.'ciO
33.37
E
2334.40
29.'18
E
1847.20
23.09



120
















BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page 21.





.D	,3;1:,;a .80	39,66	;	•1564.80,	19,56	D	3408.00	42,60
E	,3325,60	4:J;_57	:E	1639 ,.20	20.4;9	E	3S71,20	44.64
1855	A	2953,60	36.92	1866	A	2202.40	27,53	1876	A	1675.2.D	20.94
·B	30 4,'40	38,68	,B	23·l4 .40	28..93,	B	1754.40	21,9:3·
..C	3'248.80	40,61	·C	2429.6.0	3,Q.37	C	iB37;6o	22.97
D	's\'2 ,$0	b	2536,80	31.71	:0	192p,60	2,;l.07
E,	44;54	El	26 1.60	33.27	E,	2025..6!)	25.3·2·
1856	A	3315.20	4L44.	J,867	A	21.25.60	26.;;7	187"1	A	2390.40	29;88
B	'·<146,B.:oo	43.35	J3	2237.60	·27,97	B	2509'.60'	3:f.,37:
C	,3643.•20	45.•54	C	'234'1.80.	29.31	C	2624,-00,	32.,80
li	3821.60	4'7.77	:D	·2462.40	30.78,	D	2758.40	34,48
E	4004 .:80	50.06	,,   El	2s·so.80·	32.26	El	2886.40	36,08
1857	A	1849,60	23.12	1868	11.	:t.4'65.60	18.32.	1878	A	29'53,60	36,,92
,B	1932.'80	:l4.16	·B	153·3 .60	19,17	B	30,94.40	38,,68
C	2'.028.ll,O	25.3'6	.c	16()2.40	20,03	C	3248.80	40.Gl
D	2124,00'	26.55	16·73.60	2-0.92	D	s4oa'.oo	,:i':i.(iO
E	2'232. 00	27,90	E	l7U.O,O	:;!1.80	E'	3571.20	44.64
1859	A	:2348 ..00	29.35	1870	A	.181.6, OD	22. 70	1879	A	1387.20	17,34
Ii	2460.()0	3\),75	:a	1901.60,	23',77	B'	l;l5E .40	18.23
¢	2:SGs;i,o	32.07	:C	19.97. 60
24.97	C	1531.20	i9,:t4
D	2690.40	33;"63'	D	209'6;00'	26.20.	D	1598.40	19.li'!:!
E	2816.:oo	3S.20	iJ;:	219.7.60'	27.47	E	1673 ..60	20.92
1860	A	1'455.,20	18.l,9	is11 A	207.9, :;iO	25.99	1880	A	2.122.40	26.53
B	·1525. 60	19.07	ll	2179 .20	!W.,;fa	:a	223.-0,40	27;88
C	1596,0()	19.9S	22a:L20	28.54	C	2326>ao	29,21
1677.60	20.97	D	239{1,.40	29.93	D	2450.40	30,63
E	1,760.80	22.0,1	E	251'2;80	131.41.	E	25'7l..20	3'2.14'
1861	A	1708,80	21.36	:,l.872	A	2513 ,6'0	31,.42	1881	A:	11.M.80	z.i.36
J3	1791.20	22.39	B	,2636.00	32,.95	B	17·91,20	22,39
1881.60	2.3,$2•	C	2758 .40·	34.48	Cl'	,1881',:60	23,62
D	1970,40	24.'63	D	,2895,.20	36 •.l9	D,	1970)!,0'	24;63
E	2065,60	25,82	'all	303!h20	3'7:.99	'E	206S ;50.	25;82
1863	A	29.53 ,fiO	36.92	1873	A	1421;i;o	i7."17'.	1'883	A	3137.i;O	39	22
B	3094.40	38.6,8	:B	1492,.ao'	;1.8.66	B	3289.60	41.12
C	3248,80	40. i	C	1562,40	19,53	C,	3460,00	43.25
D	3408, 0,0	,:1,2,,60	D	1640.00	20.50	D'	3620·:'oo	45.25
E	3571.20	44..64.,	:E	1712,80	21.41	E	3795,:20	47,44
121







·····- -- ---·- ·-- -•,-,-,,.,.   ..  ··-···- ..	...... --·•·""'-•-···· ..	.. ·---..·-·· -·----- --···- ·-----


BASE SALARY.TABLE CLASSIFIED .SERVICE	Page22
Effective 7 -1 - 2010
_RAT,l	STmP	BIWEEKLY	. HOURLY	RATE       STEP	BJ:mJCT,Y	HOURLY	RATE.     ST,lP·	BJ:WEEKLY	HOURLY
1884	A	3137.60	39.22	1894	A	1449,i'iO	;LS..12	19Q3	A	.1455·.20	18.19
B	3289.60·	41,12	B	1519.20.	18.9;)	.B	1.525.60	19,07
C	34&0.00	43·,25	C	1590.40	19.$8	C	1596..80	19.9°6
D	3620•.00	45.25	D	,1660,00	20.'.75	·D	1675/20	20.9,a.
E	3795,20	47.44	lll	1735.20.	21.69	E	1758,040	21.-98
. 1885	A	2453.60	30,67	1895	A	1889.60	23.62	1904	A	2079,20·	25.,99
B	2572,00	32.1,5	B	1972.80	24.66	Ei	2179.,20	27-,24
G	2702,40	33.78	C.	2060.00	25.75	C	2283.20	28.54
D	2830.40	35.38	D	2163.20	21:04	D	23_94.40	29.93
E	2973.:60	37.17	E	2260.00	,28.25	E	2512.80	31.41
18_86	A	1845.60	23.0°7	1896	A	_2564,so	32.()6	i905 '.A	1209.60	l!Ll2
B	193S.20	.24.19	B	2688.80	33,"i:il	Ei	i268.00	15,85
C	2021,60	25,2.7'	C	.2824,80	35.31	C	l:321..60	1'6.,52·
D	2124.80	2ii,56"	n·	2960.QO	37.0.0	.D	1387,20	17.34
E	:;!228,80	27.86.	E	3110,40	38..88	E	111,sir.20	lB.19
1887	A	2487,20	31.09	1897	A	1749.60	21.87	1906	A	1416.00	17,70
.B	2598.40	32.48	B	1832.80	22..9.1	B	:).488,80	18,6l
C	2719.20	33_.99	C	.1924.80	24i06	C	1558,40	19.48
D	2844.00	35.55	D	2008.00	25.10	D	1635.20	20.44
E	2972.80	37..'16	E	2097.6"0	;26 22	E·	.1709..60	21.37
1888	27;1.9,,20	33.99	1898	A	144.9.60	iB.12	1907	A	1558·.40	19;4s
B	2848.80	35.61	:a	1519.20	18,99	B	163S.20.	20.44
C	2997.60	37;47	0	1590.4()	19.88	C	1709,60	21.37
D	3137.60	39.22	D	1660.00	20.75	D	1793,61)	22.42







E	1952'.ao	24,41	E	1976.80	.)He,?l.	E	1752.00	21.90
1892	A	2297.60	28.72	1901	A	1531.20	19.14	1910	A	1021·.20	12.84
B	241S,20	30.l9	B	1601.60	20.02	B.	1073.60	13.4:i!
C	:;/532.80	31.66	C	1676.20	20,94	c	112 .20	14.04
D	2659i20	33.24	D	1764.00	22,05	D	1179.20	14,74
B	2793,60	34.92	E	1841.60	23.02	E	1231.20	15.39
:I.893	A	:l,594.40	19,93	190,2	A	1331.20	16.64	1912	A	18':1.4.40	22,68
B	1671_.20	20,69	.. B	1395..20	1,7,:44	B	1895,20 	23.69
C	1748.00	21.85	C	14S5.20	18,19	C	1992.80	24,91',
D	1828.. QO	22,85	D	1525.60	19.07	D	'2079.20	25.99
B	:L908.80	23.'86	E	lS.96. BO	19.96	E	'2177_.60	27.22

t
122

-...... ·- -··--- ·-··---··---···-·--------
·---·--···•--'-'---     .. -· '----·----·--···· -·----····-··--·-··-- ·-· ·-  .. -· ...	. ··---·--·· ·- --····..-· .. -·-"











8ASESALARY TABLE CLASSIFI.ED .Sl:RVICE	Page 23
Effective 7 -1-.2Q.10





.c	876.8.0	10,96.
D	923 20	11,54,

C	3105,60	38,,82	C	li651.20	20..64
3:;J56 :oo	•40·.,,,.70	D	1725,60	21.57
E	95Jl'.40	11.98.,	E	3408.80	,42,6:t	l)J	.1804..80	2.2.. 56
:I.91.5	.ii:	2436:.80	30.,46	1925	11.:	4-432,80	'17\!:ll	19:;14	A	:;1.3·05,:60	16.32
B	2561.60	32·.02	:a	1500,80	'18,76	B	.13'6'8,80	11:11
C	. 2(i7_6.00	33,45	C	1568 .80	19.61	C	1436·,.po	17.95
D	2811, 20	35,:J,.4	D	1644.80	:20,56	b	1500,80	;) 8,76
:i;;	2940.00	36 ..75	E	1720.0·0·	21.50	E	1569;'60	19.62'
1917	A	2$68,00	,32.10	1926	11.	2568,00	32.10	1935	A	2953,60	36,9.2
B	268:,J.60	33.62	B.	2689.6_0	33'.,.62	B	3.Q9il,,40	38,68
C	2$24.80	3'5,31	C	,2 24,8'b	.,3S·.31	C	·3248.80	40.61
D	2.967 ..20	37"09	p	2!J67 .20	37.09	D	,;!408,00	!l,:L'?O
E	3111.20	38.89
E	3111.20	38.8,9	E	3571.:20	44,6'4
19i8 JI.		;i.os.6ii	26.32	192_7	A	251,9.20	31':.99	i936 A	,J.053,.60	l.3 ,l.'1 J3	2  16'.80	27.71		B	2680.80	33.51		B	1104.00	13. 8'0
C	2305.40	28..83	C	2815.20	35',+9	c·	1:152.80	14..41
D	241;!1. 60	30.21	p	2956.00	36;:95	D	12□9.60	J;5.i2
E	.2$40,0ci	31.75	E	3099..20	3.8,,74	E	1268,00	is ,'05
19l:9	A	ua:o.oo	14,75'	.;l.92$	:A	2332,.80	29',16	19.37	A·	2240.8_0	28.01
B	l;,2:,1,3, 60	15.42	B	2440,00	.3o,·so	B	2345,60	29.32
!l;;1. g

i.92i	A	1371,20	17. ;j.4	1930	A	1600,0.0	20.00	;J.939	A	2562,40	32.03
B	,1430.4'0	17.88	B	1678•.40	20,98·	B	2681,60	33.52
C	14'96.80.	18,71	¢	1756.80	21.96	C,	281:6.-00	35.20
D	15(,8.B'0'	19.61	D	1&44.00	23.05	D	2953 .6()	36,92
El	1649,60	20,·,62	E	1932.8'0	,24,.·16'..	B	,38,68
192:2	A	2703 .20	33,79	1931     .A	1887,20	23.59	194_0	A	28:.54
B	2a2'a,·oo	35.35	B	i97ll',80.	24,66	B	2394.4'0'	2'9,93
C	·2968.80	37..11	C	•2076..!lO	25:,95	C	2512,80	31.41
D	3114,,40	38.,93	p	!2181.60	27·.27'	D	2µ26.:4/0	32;83
l'l	,3264,.• 00	4-0.80	E	2287..20	'28,59	E	;l760'.oo	3'4,50

123







···- ·-· --·-· -- --------·------·..•	. -· -··· - . ·-     ,.

-···


BASE SALARY TABLE CLASSIFIED SERVICE	Page24
Effective 7-1-2010

RATE
STEP
BIWEEK!'.,Y .
HOURLY
RATE.
STEP
BIWEEKLY
ll;OURLY
RATE
STEJ?
BIWEEKLY
HOURLY
1941

A

25'3'8.40

3·1.73

1966

A

2511,20

31,39

1976
A

22$2,AO

28.53

B
2656.00
33.20

B
2633 ,6.0
32.92

B
2388.00
29.85

C
2796.00
.34,.95

C
2764.00
34.55

C
2509.60
31.37

D
2939.20
3.6.74

:0
2888,80
36,11

D
2625.60
32.82

E
3079.20
38.49

E.
303€;.. 00
37.95

E
2.760:00
34,50
1946
A
12.81..60
1·6.02
1967
A
2824,80
35.31
1977
A·
2692:80
33..66

B
1336..80
l.6.71

B
2958,40
36.98

B
2819.20
35.24

C
1396.00
17 ..4.5

C
3107,20
38.84

C
2959.20
36.99

D
'1457.J/0
:18 .22

D
3264,00
40.80

D
3105,60
38.82

E
1525.60
19.07

E
3422-40
42.7B

E
3251.20
40.64
1947	A	13.96.00.	;17.45	1968	.A	1406,40	17.5B	1978	A	1174.40	14.68
ri	1457.60	18.2.2	.B	1468.80	18.36	B	1223,20	15,29
C	1525,60	·19.07	C	1534.40	i9,1B	C	;!;281.60	16.02
D	1596.00	1'9,9.5	:D	1600,00	20..00	D	1336.80 	16.71
E	11',E,8,00	20.as	E	1.6,76.00	20.,95	E	1396.. 00	17.45
1.955	A	237'7.60	29.72	1969	A	1344,8·0	16..81	1979	A	1281.60	16.02
B	2500.80..	31.26	B	1402,40	17,53	B	1336,80	16.71
C	2617.60	32-7'4	C	1464.80	18.31,	C	1396.00	17.45
D	274:6.40	34.33	D	1529.60	19,12	D	1457.60	18.22
Ji!·	2876.80	35••96	E	l.600,80	20.01	E	1525.60	19.07
1956	A	1811.2().	22,64	1970	A	1564.80	19.56	1980	11.	2000.00	25,00
B	19-00.00	23.75	B	1640..80	20.,51	B.	209'7.60	!;l6.22
C	:\,978.40	24.73	C	. 1718.40	21,48	C	219.8.40	27 .,ra
D	·2079,20	25,I19	D	1796,00	22,45	D	2303,20	28.79
E	2174•.40	21 ;19	E	1888.,oo	23.60	E	24;j:6,80	30.21
1957	A	208;3.20.	26,04	1971	A	2283.20	28,54	1982	A	1211.20	15,14
B	2184.00	27.30	B	2:'!$4,40	29.93	B	1268.00	15.85
C	2275,80	28.,46	C	2512.80	31.41	C	132,1.6.0	16 52
D	23'91,20	29 ,,Bf)	D	2626.49	32.83	D	iSB7,20	17,34
E	2500,80	31.26	·E	2760.00	34.'50	E	1458,40	18.23
1961	A	19.04.80	23 ,81	1972	11.	256  00	32.10	1983	A	1421,60	17.77
B	1995;20	24,94	B	2689.60	33.62	B	l49L20	18,64
C	2097,tiO	26.22	C	28.24.80	35,'31	C	1560.00	19,50
D	2,200.80	27.51	D	2967;20	37.09	D	1537;50,	20.47
,Jli	2306.40	29;s3	E	3111.20	38.89	E,	:L712.80	21,4,1
;!;964	A	1.881.60:	23•;'52	1974	A	1672.00	20.9·0	1985	A	1706,40	21,33
.B	197'1.6.0	24.72	B	1741.60,	21.77	B	1791.20	22.39
C	2075;.oo	25,95	C	1826.40	22.83	C	1872.00	23.40
D	2172,00	27.15	D	1907,20	23.84	D	19!ii2.80	24,4:l,
El	2.2a1.:i'o	28.59	E	1999,20	24,fl9	E	2046.40	25.58
1965
A
2287.20
28,59
1975
'A
19·16,.00
22.70
198S
A
2616.80
32.71

B
2396.80.
29.96

B
1901.60
23.7?

B
2733..60
34.17

d
251;1..20
3;1..39

C
1997,.60
·24.97

C
2!360.80
35.76

D
2.633 ,60
32.92

D
2096,00
26.20

D
2992'i00
37.,40

E
2764.00
34.55

E
2197,60
27,47

E
3127,20
39·;09


124

. -···"-     .... ···- -----·-·--·-··-··--- -·---       -     -·--·---- ----    ----'--'--   ---········----·-··-··-'---'·-------···--·----·-•-·-·-·-. -··	--·•··--··    -  -  --	·-----------·----·-·---·•·-..














BASE SALARY TABLI: CLASSIFlED SERVICE	'Page·25
Effective 7 -1 - 2()10
MTE	STEP	BIWEEKLY	HOURLY·	ll.ATE  STEP'	BINEEkLY	HOURLY	RATE  STEP	BIWEEXLY	HOURLY...
19$7	1\.	2972,80	31.16	:il39	,A	930'40·	11"63
B	3114.'40,	3.!l.93'	B	'979 .20	1'2.2'4
C	-3277.6))'	40.97	C	1024,il'O	'12.',1)1
:0	3430.40	4:ia:.88	Jj	1069;60	13·.37
-E	,3596.80	44.96	E	i122.40:	'14.·03
1988'	A	2274.40,,	:i's,:<13:	2166	A	-1500. Gci	'18.75
:e.	237i;"•.80	21:i.n	:1sw.20	19,69
C	2'\\8'¾,00	3L:os	C	1654.40	20:68
D	2602,.40,	32.53	D	1736,00	2;(',,70
E	271sf;20	33,'99	:E	1824,00	·?2•80
1991	A	1,67?.00	.;;ro ,90	2169	A	933 .·60	11.,67
E	174;1.60	21.n	B	.,98'0 .oo,	·12.,25
1826'.40	22.83'	C	1026 .40'	;t.2.83
D	1907,20.	23.·84	D	'.Hi\72,00	'13.40
E	'll.999,20'	24,99	E	1123·;20'	14.0'4
1992	A	12s1;15-0	16.. 02	2185	A	11825,60	22.82
E	1336 8'0:	16,Ti	B	19'i6,80	23,96
,c	13,96.00	J,7,4'5	'C	2012..qo	25 .:1,5
D	14;57·.:6()	18'. 2	:ti	2112 .so	:26,'il.1
Jll	1525.'60	19;07	1..	E	2217.60	21.12
1994	A	;;ii:;64 ..aq·	32.06	2.!L.86	A	933,61:i,	ii.67
B	'26:84,80	33.56
C	,\8;19.:;!,0	35;24
·Bc
,9ao,.;oo·:	·12_..2s
':!.026AO·	1:L.8:;i
D.	2957,..60	36,·!n	.D	l().'72. oo:	1,3'.4{)
E	3096 .80	38.71	E	:ti:,i3;20,	1,..04
:j.995	A	64,1;(81J	8.0.!,	2188	A	716.00,	8,9·5
ii.	684.00	8.5;;	B	7$0.40.	11:sa
C	·,   7:1;;1. 60	,8,.92,	C	78 .8-0	"9,81
D	750;40	,9,,,·sa·	D	'823.20	'10. 29
E	"7.8);1'.00	}J .• 85'	.E	ass:40·	10.73
1997	A	i722.40	;;!1.53
B	,180<.1'.80	2.i.56'
1890.40	2f.p3
D.	;l.983.20	24.'7}.1
E	2078,-40	25,96




















125











EXHIBITS





















THE CITY OF SAN DIEGO CLASSIFIED SERVICE•
CLASSES AND STANOARD RATES
EXHIBITS
u.v•..
JULY 1, 2010








(;lassifiec:fServloe Classes ancl $tandijrd Rates.

Standard
Rate Number



;BUI PING :i:NSl;Jl!lO'r:tON

. .comb:l.t;tati<:iP. :tp;t;!peJito:r :i: Combination InspGlctor I? l1l:!;$Ot:d.qal      nspedtd:t('.    :i; '.ElJ, otr:i,oa,t '!(:111;1p113qt;o:r,: :r:j; .!


12"!6
1:di
E:ouai:hg Inspec·t:.or :.t
1164
;ijousin9" ±nspee:i.t,o;i:;- ;r::i:

Meohanida1 I:nspeci.to:r .:r
1171
ME!obaoic:J(:;J. I11speo:t;.o:r: :tI
11.72
S.enio:r Cdmbi:nation J:rifiip.ecitoi'
1849
seniqr E;l@ctt;r;j.oa I;iJ1peo.to!l7
11:63
Senior Houming Inepeoto:r
1.166
s.enior i-1ec:Jbanioal Inspec;it,9:r
,;l.173
Senior St:mJ.atu:r.a.1 Iii.speot:ox
ll79
St:iw.ot;.µ:ral :C:napetrl;:9;i:- :r.
11.77
Structural Inspedt:o:r II





Asbestos and:tead '.fii:i:6gram fns ect6r
As1:1ist;a:p,t ChEl!l)iS.t
Assistant Laboratory 'l'e¢.hnipi;iµi
Associate. C4emi t
s:1.01osili!t   :i;


J,1 6
1160

1220
1 2







Classified $ervice Cl sses and Standard REltes

Standard
fujte..Number



Biologist II

B:i.ologiat III
1622
Hazardous Materi ls Inspector I
15 6
Hazardous Materials Inspeotor :Cl
1527
Hal.llardoui;i Materiais  :r::nspector :r.:i::r
1S44
aaza:i:"<.;tous M;al::liidals/1?:i:-et:i:eatment 'J;':i:a:l.ri.ee
1524
Ha!!:ard,oi.i.s Mate:tiallil J?;i:;Ogram Mai.J.age:i:
1500
Junior Chemist
:l-543
!,aboratocy Assistant
1578
Labarator..r ".reahnioian
1580
:t:ine Biol.qgbt ::i;
i!.609
Marinli'l ;Biologist tI
1610
Ma;r::Lne Biologist :c:tI
1611
s.enior Bio:j.og:l.t,i,t
18.04
senior chemist
18S4
Senior Ma.dx1e Biolog'ist
1851
Stipe;rviEii:n:g Haza.:r.·dous Materials  '.l'.r.i,speoto:r
1896
Stipervisi:ng Wastewate:i: l?retrea.tment I:n.specto:r
1378
Wastew/il,ter Pret:t:eatment  Inspector :r
1374
wastew ter. Pretreatment  :Cn,spe¢itor  II.
'1375
wast:ewate:t· Pret.:ceatment I:t1.spector :.tn
13'7.6
Wastewater Pretreatment  P:i:ogram. Mauage:i:•
1528



Classified s.ervioe Class{1s and Stantjard .Rates
. St ndard,
    • Bat Nymbeir.




Account Clerk
:t.:1.04
count Audit C:J..e:t'.lt
l;;!.Q3
Auto Mesaetige:t'. :i:
l.23i;i.
uto e1;1s.m-ige:i;- :i;:r
1194;
J!enefits R.ep:r.esehtative :r
1255
cBl3n'i>f;Lts 1tep:t.1¢!ll )!l;t?1.tive :IJ:
i25-Q.
Boo o ile Pdve;i:-
12.ea
C!a.sh:t z,
i.33.0.
C;L .mlll Cle?t'k
1:':l4l;
c;;q,9.,:iQiil+ Asiois:t, t i
1669>
Cleri6a,1 l r:1i tattp_ :tt
11535
Gontract:111 Proo1;isll!i1:1g Clexk

Co oil S 9:t:' t :ry ;
1381
Cou t Si1pport Cle.rk :t
.1386"
Q :ll rt uppc:i:rt  Cle:t;k  II
1 88
customer servio@s Eep:r.'as!':i:n.ta;t:f:ve
:13 4
D(?puty City.O::Lerk ±
13 5
Deput;v City Cle:i:]¢:t::C
"1$$(5
:O;i.;1;1po(1Jal Site	p:res_ent:ative
1.i.1,12,
l!ialtoli/Pi.'oof:reiii,ae:t
·1:,M;(i
:E::itecu:t;;ive $eaz,$ta,:tr
),871$
:tr+t.ermed;f.ate ste:n9grapher .('l'e:i:'mina;i)





Classified Service Clasaes and Standard Rates

Standard
fl!at!LNun1be r



Legal. Secretary .I
Legal Seoretacy :n:
teg "slative Reoorder I
:Weg .slative Reoorde:r  I:l'.

L±'.b1 aey 2);:lde

:tib:i::a;r.y Clerlt
Li:b:ra:i:y Teohnio:La:.n
Mio:rog:ra,phics Clerk
J:ay:roll Audit Specialist :r:
Payrol:1, Audit Specialist I:t
11ayroll Audit supervisor Audi ot Payroll Audit Su.pe::rviso:r.- - l?e:rso:rinel l?a:yroll  S:pe.::iialist :r
Pa,y:r.oll Sped;!.alil;/t,.:CI· J.lay;tdl,l Superviso:i:
l?o.lioe . :aeoo:t::ds Cl.erk P:r.i:nc:i.pal Clerk
J?dnoipd cus:b.on'ler Ser.v:i.oes &e:r,n::eeentative
l?dnoipal. Legal Seoretafy'
i?.:r:!.i1.cd.pal J?ol:l.oe Records Cle:rk
J?:r:in.a:1.pa:1.  Test      Administration  spei:d..alist
P. bi:Lo Info:t:ma.tion cie:rk Pllbld.o Xnfo:r;matio SpeoiaHst

137.9
157'7

;1,382

138.3




'.l."/58

1617
1647
'.l.64.9

'.1;886'

16$
12.37
154$

1238
l"/20

1726

1722


'.1.72:.t.
1723

1776,

.J.'774:












Standard
B.1.1te  No,.w.b,er.
Classifietj Service CLass.es. and Standard ,iFlates


J?u'.bl:Lo I:nformat;on s:µpe;i.::vis.ol:'.
Publit se:r:vice Ca.rear i:rrainee

e.ti	nt Ms;l,sta:q,t
Senior Ai.:Womit  Cle:d;;
@e1ito:{ At:109uµt. ,?i,ud:Lt Cl,e:r)c
senio:t Account$ lta',yable Audit .Cl;e;tt-k
$eniqr Be.nefit:.s ·Re reseiitabive,.
senio:t:' Ca1;1h:;l.e:r
S.enior qle:rk/T:ypist
Se:rd,or   Ct'(stoJne:r.. $e;rvioes '.Rep:r.esenta.tive
eniq:i:: :o;J.s:p.osi':t,l. f,1;!, e P,er;>resentat,:l.vt:1
senior Legal seoreta Senio;i:- Legislative Reoo:rde:r Senior Lib:ra:ry Teahniciian t;Jenio:i:' Pol:l,pe Reoo:r¢li;l cl erk
Seinipr Te/lit Ai;'lmini1;1t;tia;cd.on Spe9ia:Litii,b
Student:: Wo:rke:r
Stipervisfog b.t/1.ipq l Site R.epz-el:lMta.t:l:<.re Test 2-l.dmi htr ttl<,tn s.pE;ioiaii1;1t
Vehiol.e a,nd ll'U$l. Cle:rk
:wo:i;-d. .l?:t'ooessing- o;oe:ratox
1778
:l.5% .l',,11,1:tow
(t. :rg t e11ass)
iao1
1844

1133
:l..809

lL.2 7
:I.$4,Q

18'79

1860

1864

1820
tl;8$7

1759

1853

18.52
:1$.:t'/,.

9 0
3,41.9

1.982

17?.\6








Standard
Rate Numbet
..7 ..
.	.
Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates





Dis.patche:i:- :C ,

Diispatoher :r:t
:Fire Dispatch Su;t:,e:tV.\i.sor
:Fire Dispatohex-
Jri;re Disp,atoh Adridnistrator Police :Oil:lpatoh :Admil:'l.istrator l?olio1;1 :Oieipatoh Superv so
l?olj.oe :i:>:lspatche:r
•J?oliae :Wead Dispatcher
l?ublio, Works  '.D;i.sp t,cher
Public wox:ks Dispatch supe±visor


CONS .R'O'Ci1ION  .i\lID  MAI 'J'IJ!;NANC:;E
1410
1411 •




1017
1195
1918
1714
166:J.
17615

1767

z,,,ssiatant :Rese:rv- :t:r. lteeper
Build pg Service Technician
ll93
1280
Building- Setvices Supe:ririsor
1275
:auild:tng supe:rvisol:'
1274
General Utility .Supe:rvis6±
1976
;	.,·	'
General water Utility Superviso:t
:).4$8
Laborer
1579
I., e Aide I
1572
J:,alte Aide I:!i

Pd,M:1.,pal Utility Supervisor
1980
Principal Wat;er tJt:LHty Super.visor
1734.











Standard
Rate NumbQ(



J:lubl:ld Wo:r.ks $upednt nd 1i::. l?ubl:Lc. Wo:t::;k.s Sut,e:i:visqr
Rese:i:voi:r !Keepe:r
SenioZ'. St bie .tl,tt..enda.nt
senior Utilit:y Supervisor
s n:im: w ter Utility Su,perv;tsozj
' Stable Atte;o,dai1:t
St.1;1.di)lt(l Ml;\;i:ritexl Qe 131,1:p :rviso:i:­ StMh:un ·Mainte:n oe 'l'echnio:lei.n Tank s.el'.'V:1.pe Teci'.hri.i.oian ±
'fiil.nk setv::l,c.e ll'e¢li'r.l-:toian :r;c
t.rtility S,uperviE:Jor Utility worker .I Utility Worke:t ;q:
,Water Systenis :bisti:'i¢t Mane.ger Wi;J.tei Bys,te.ms l'eohp;ician :t Gl.teZ'. Systems 'i'echi.ii.oiari :n:i; Wa.te:r Systems Te.ohnici  III water syf;ltems 'J.'(;!9hnioian :r.v
W;;i.ter !:IY tems '.J:'eolm.ic;1.1\1:r,, S\tpe;i:v;Ls.o:r
W i:er 'Ot;.ility •$\lP<=t'V':il\H'.l:t:
Watet t1tility Worker
•Work ·aervioe  A:tde

1 7'7
1961
1!117

:l.9(!9 19713 l.!)70,, 1908
'1$.,97
1asa

194;7
l971Ji
l.978
3.,9.79
1016
101.l
:l0l.2

1013
10.l
1015
1991
19.92




Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard.
Rate .Nucnb.at




OUS';t'Oi:>IA:t,

Custodia:ri :c Custodiari II Custodian III
Supar'<l'ising· custodian.


1387

:t.389


1919


DATA l?ROC!'.m$SING
l?ol:l.oe :iieoc,rds pata Specialist	1575
l?oliae E.$oords Pa.ta. Spec:Lalist: S1\pervis9r	15'16
''i!
Progranun.e:r   Analyst: I	17 4"I
Prograntrne:i:-. Analyst ::cI	1748
P!l:'09':Ci;UIUner Analyst III	l 749
Senior 1?¢1:1,oe Reoo:i;:ds .Pata Spe9;Lalist Su:pe:i:.visoz,	1865
Senio:i:•  $/steins Analyst	187'7



Assistant  I!lng:i:nee:i:	Ci'.V'Ji.l As.sistant Engineer - E1eot:i:-. oa:L Ass.:ist:!ll!lt Engineer ... MeohiiU1:lc.1al Assistant. :mnginee:r	Traffia Assistant Park b sigrier
,61-Ssooiab Communications lllitg.1.:neer
Associate  Jl!ng:l.r1eer  -  Chril




1153
11.S.7
l1t)7
:1.207
1'168
:1,2:J.9

12:;ll






Standard
Rate Number



1%.ss.oc:lat,e lJlngine ;-	Corros;Lo AS(;JOCiate :mnginee:r	Elecj::.rie1al Aasooiate mnwineer . Meaha:itl,oaJ.
asoci:l;at;l:l Ii; gi:o.e1?r ,.. tt':raf:Eio
••••••• ""h••,  ',
;oz,c;1.ft::l,ng .i\ic.:l.e, ll);ng:i.1,1. iadng T:rainee H:yd:rog:ra,ptcy- Aide
.:ru:nio:r Ei.tg:lriee · - Civil iJ'1;1n:1,\o lil:q.gi:Q.e t<	lill ptri,9al v\ui.io:r Eng:Lne.e,r .. Meo nfo l, qµri,iqr I/lngineedpg Ai¢le
Lang, Su:rve: "ing Assist;uit '.!:land :Su:ijveying Asilioc:l.a.te J?ei.:rk De$.igne:r
Plan ,aeview Special.ist I
Pl    .!!;)view Sp oial:i.st :r.:t
:rnan ev:J..ew sp,edialisi;, u:r
,J?:tan evi.ew Speoir,;1,list, :i:y l?olicie special Projecits Manager P:ri:noipa.1 Drafting M¢1.
l?:r noip l ElP ±ne1?dng Aicle l?dnc;lp1;1;l l?l.M l\l;lview SliJeo:ialist l?x::J.:nc:l:J?e.ti Elu:ivey Aid ·
l?tine:lpal 'l':ra:E:fidEngineering Aide·

1.385
1,223

122

:1.233
l4 :a
14:32

is20 154.6 i!552 1562
155El
193$
l.!il3Q

t6 8
:t..as.s
j,6 6

1657

;1.658

1754
:I.'7i!5
;t.7';,.7

1724
:l.52;5 1730
i?:ro:j ea..t.
l-\.sa.i.st.@.  t
'l.%50
l?xci.:)ect Officer I
1·1s1








Classified Service Cla$ses and Standar9 Ril!tes

Standard
Bate Nu,      ..m,IJ     b.!   e-  r



J?r.ojeot. O:Efice:t'  :CI
.1152
senior Civil r.-i:iigineer
18.55
Send..o:r.• Conununioations Engineer
),346'
@en:J.or Draft.:t;n,g Aide
14;!3
senior .Eleotdoal Engineer
,1863
Senior   Engineer    M         1!':L.re J?:roteot:.io:n
1467
Setdor lll:ngirxaer:!.ti,g Aide '
1861
Senior Engineering Geologist
;L806
Senior Lan Surveyor

Senior Meciha.nical Engineer
1830
senio:i: Survey Aide
l881
s :n or Traffic Engineer
1878
Struotura.l :eingi:neeri;ng Assistant
1 08
St:n:i:6tµ:ra.l Eri.giriee:ring· Aasoc.ria:te
12$1
St:rttotural l!l:n.g.i:rl(;le:ring Se:t,tior
18"/5
$b:udent Engineer

Supervising Plan Review Specit¼l.iSt
Work control :Manager


1994



Classified S$rvic Classes and Standard Rate,

Standard
Rate Number




2-\.hc:r.ift M Clhaji,io Ag;uatios Te,ol:l, :I..Q:lan I A,<;r4:c;itios '.t'c$t::il:u:lioian I:i:
.AquaUcs •r olm.ic;:J:i.an /3µpe:i::v;\,i;io:i::
1145

:l.737

1732
1'i.38

E;J.d.fJtant w .t'i ir :n:t.stdput;i.9:n op iat9ll:'
2ody and ll'e.nder .?Jleo1:ia.nio Jllg:u,ipment Meohanil..<:i Equipment•!?eti:o.te:1.
136$

12.6#.I

14 1
144>6.
Elg;uipfueµt epa;r SiupE:1rv:i,fi:1o;r
_1435
Equipment $.ew:i,oe Supervis9:c
1451
Equipment Se:r.vioe Wr:tte:t'
l.447
:Wg;uipment Teohriio:l.an .l
11,3 t?
lllquip1:nen:t 'i'eo.hniois,ii II
.lA :a
Ef ipni.ent '.t'echii:Lciari :c:r:t
144:1:
W:.i;:rea:r.ms eohn.iOiEUl.
11.91
Fleet N,1aintena1iqe Sttperviso.:r
:1.1:<!,6
Fle t M@lii.g'et
:tt/5 .
Maoh :u:Ls-t.
1602
M :dni;! ..M phan;id
;J.608
et.al ll'a.bdoation Services Supe:rvis6:r
16'04
Metal li'ab:rica.t11:ni upe:i;v soa;
16;!.6
Mot:!:ve Se:rvioe ':t'e,ohnioian
14,52

-13-

Classlfled Service Classes and Standard Rate$

Standard Bat L. U1n bee



Mot:.i-v•e service Trainee l?ar.ldrig Meter Su.perv:Lso:r Parking Meter 'l'eotm..:Ldi¥J,
Plant Teolmioian I
1449
:1,64!>
11541
iis$2
Plant. Te.chnician It
165,3
l?la.:tlt. 'l'eohnio:i.an III
1654
Plant !l'eohnioian su.pe r:i.sor
J.6.69
Power Pleu1t Ope ator
1717
.l?qwe:r l?bne Supe:ri:ntendent
1739
l?owe:r.: Plant superv-isor
1718
P:rtn:cipal l?lant 'l'echnici1:1:n supervisor
1670
Pinup Station Ope:,:ations supervisor
1373
Pum,p Station o:r;ie:i:ator
1372
Pump Station Operato:r: 'J.':rainee
1371
sen:Lo:r Motive Se:rvioe Tecihnician
14!,';Q
Senior J?arking Meter Teqh;nician
1803
Senior l?la:nt 'i'eqhniciart supetvi1;1or
;:1.671
Se:nio:t.' l?ower Plant supe:r:-v-iiilo:r
:I.915
water :Oistdbution Ope:r.·ato:r.·
1369
Water Diat:dbution ope:rations super\/';Lso:r.
1.370
Wate:I'.' :Distribution ope:rato:r. Trainee
1.367
Weldet
198.!5







Cla$sifled Se.rvic:f;l CIR!$$!;3S and $tanda,rd Elates
Standatd
B..mst,NUrY),l? r



l!JQU:CJ?MEN'I' OPlll'.RAt.l:'J:ON'

Area, :R. fu1;1e aollect:l.on super'V"il!!Qr
18,35
Boat Ope:tator
1266
:bisposa:\. Si·t,e Supel!.'.v:i.aor
41:;J
District :aefuae Colleatioli Supe:t:visor
1.$. 9
:rugu:lpJ!lent QJ?eza.:t,.q:r r.
14
lll iP,xnent ·opez-ato:r II
'14/4,Q
:mqu .pment Opera.tor :c:r:t
1'445
Equipment 'l':i:-a;inet
1442
:aeavy 'I':ll"l+9k od YSl;' :c
1513
1teaVy T:i:tiak Driver !:r:
1512
:t :m:i.f:Lll Equipment Ope:i;.ator
:(5?3
Light Equipment Operator
15.94
Motor swMp Operel;tor
i6?.IS
Mqt;cn: Bwe, e:i: .Su:perv:J.soi'
:;1.6':LB
l1ef1;g;e  Goll$otion..  • Manage:i;:-
uu
{3;;µ.,.{ta1:: on Di';LV$:I: X
1834
Sanitation  O:r:i:iter • !l
1832
'S.ati,it t pn p;i;:ive;r x:q:
1824
sru:itt!.\tion·:o:t.;1.vel:' 'l':ra.inee
1833
Se,;i..!lo:r: jjloat Op1;1l:\ato;r,
.:l.21',i7
senior. :Oisp9sal Site Supervtso:&
·1866
t:.leven.-Ga.ng Mo er O)i'.!e:i:ata:r
.12.65
Tr •f:Eio s:tdper Operator
1626





Standard
-Rate Number
Classified Service Classes and Stantjard Rates



F.:J:J!lLD CON'l'AC'l'
A:L:rport Operat:i,e>ns ASsistant
Assists.nt Cu,stomer Services supe:rv:l.so:r
, Cii::y. tt.orney l'.l;l.V'estigatb:r
Claims Aide
Cl.a.ims R. prera¢ntp1,l;.iye .J: Claims Representative :c:t Code  Compl:i,ou:ioe Of;/:ioer Code complia oe .Supe:rvisor Collectd.ont:l ._:i:nv·estigator I
Colleet;l,o:ns Investigator J;I Collections Investigator ;i: ;t; Collections :CnVl'-lst.ig-ator 'l':rai:0.1\H\)






3.6'95

j,3 0
1342

1,343

13'56

:1357

1331
"1332


:l:334
Customer Services Superv:Lsc;,r	,,
Field eprel(lentative Investigation Suppqrt Manager
1393
146!5

:1.Sl:t\4
l?a Jd:ng Elnfp:rderiiant Officer I
1640
l?arkir1g lllnfo:ro('!!ment O:fficer II
·.16a,o
l?ark:l.ng :Jl!nfoJ;bem$nt $u:pe:!':ViSot·
:t.639
li!oli e Code eo1npliandja Off ioer
1361







St ndard
Rat
.c11:1ssifi d $ervioe Cla$ses and ;$tandard Rates



l?ol:Loe Code Compliax,ioe Supe:i;-viso:l;.'
1:/}62
:P.#ndipa:L City Attorney :t:t.iv rstiga.to:11'
1'128
Sa:eetr Rep:rel!Je tative rr:
1132$
Safei:;y Rep:i::e13ehti:\,t;L'iie ;'.f;l:
:t.8.26:
S.enio:t' A:i,.rpox·t operations A.li!s:1.stim.t
180.B:
$(:)11iqr dity Atto:i;ne;iy :i:n:11:e t gato:r
16$.5
senior c1a:tmi.\l ne fi;isentati'll'e
1927:
Senior dode Compl:Larice .li!:u;t;ie:i:"ll'"isoi•
1 12:
senior Pa,:dd.ng. lllnfo:roemeitt: supervisor
114,8.
Spec.:l,a,;L Events T:r.<afll;ic •coritiol · S.Upe:rvfso:r
l9::i3
$peoi '.L l'llV tits .T'.l;'a.i;.fio Oont;;rol;Ler I
l:9q4
Speq;t,i;t, :etvents m:rr.,.f io do t:ro1 ii?r tI
19$2;
Supe:tv•bi:n!if Field Rei:n:-eseiitattve
:1.921
S'llpe i!,!ing- Meter Rea4er





:Ai:i:' qP.ci:cat;; :n!l! dh:ief
ssistq!nt Fi:t'e Marshal
·. mer ency Medica; :l,'eohn;l;cd,etn
li'ire llattalion dbief
ll'iz,e bapta±n
Fire Engineer
JJ1ire Fifij'hte:i:- :C



:L:I.56

15l.7·

1483
14/56

1.4,$8

l4E11





Cl..assified Service Classes anti Standard Rates
Standard
Bate Number




.ll'.i:r,e li'ighter :r:i:


li'i:re Fighte:t :c:c:r:
.1020

F:l:i:-e Relioopter. Pilot
:1.i:so

Fir$ Prevention :t:nspeoto:i:- I
1414,

Fi:r.e :t?revention Inapeato:i:: :r:c
1475

Fi:re Prevention Supet.vi.so:i:·
1476

i;r:s Reo:ruit
1463

J?a:ramedio I
1506



150'7

GIRAli':tIJ: OS



G:r,a.phio donn:m1r.iica:l:io:ns Manager
1347

Graphic Oesimt. supe:rv;Lsp:r
1489

Grap ia beslgri:er .•


Multimedia Pr<;i4:uotion CQord;i:nator
12. .$

Multimedia J?:e-6d.1J.qt:Lon Speed;alist
12 0

l?hc:rl:013':taphe:r
166.0




L:LJ:n:'a.:dein I


1671

tii:brar:Lan II
ll384



:ta/5'.7

L.i:b:ra:dan IV
115$5






Standl'.:lrd
Ba § Number



J :i,;b;t:-a:i:>r M!:!:Lstant
    • supe:rv;l,si:p.g :Lb:i;,lll,riart

.15$

l!il,22


l!,.(;l :U: u:', Jl':X:SQAL JµqD SWA1l"Ii'
Aooqu;ntap.t :c	1:1.02
Aaqoµni:c1t.1t :c:i:	842
-J.\OOQ't1:P,tant :tl!I	J;lO 0
)\.qoou.t1:t:;ant :c'ii	:t'183
Acoounta):.lt 'l':i;'a,:b1.ee	153.8
i·
Aq.111inistZ' tive A:tde  I	1105
A¢lm:ln:l,st;t:'ativ$ )\.id  I;I	ll07

4'1,g:dcrult;u:ri11;1 Lease Ma ger,

1110
Airport M aget
.P.ii;'pqrt I'i!Q:l,1:1e lU:> temr;nt Off;l.d r

1118
iiie;
Ap:plioations Prog:ranimi(ar :i:

1240
.1-\ppl.icatio'.tl.s l?l\'og:camme:r l:I

1241.
Ap:plicatio:i;g1 Pii:cig:l:'an:ime:i:i Ill

1242
A;RJ!S Zi,dminist:rator

1253
Ar$l;lestos .l?r;psx:atn M uager

1:J.t9
As1:1ist.1;1.nt;. B;udget :;o10veioJ?m.ent Analyst

.19 64
Asl\listllllt Pepti1,ir:tme:nt 'Ull)an 'Res.o.ui:o.1pr;i
alyst
13 f:$3
Assistant Economist

11'5.8
.AsJ:Jistant Jl1a.cil:i.ty .Ma!;;J.i;l,ger

;t1S9







Classified Servioe. Glass s and St ndatd Ra es.

Standard
!i e Numb..



Assj,sta:r1t Management Analyst
11.32
Assistant l:'ersonnel 1\;nalyst
1170
Assist 'lt l?±'o1;>erty Agent
118:L
.ll.ss:l.stant Rate An lyst
ll.90
Associiata :aud.get Development:. ,Anal:yst
19!55
A,sso<::J!ate Depart:ment Humati. Resou.roes Analyst
1364
.Assocfate l1loon6mist
1222
A1;1sociate lv.ta:i,.iag-f.\\me:r:i,t 1:tlyst
J. 18
Associate Personnel Analyst
1226
ASsoc.iate :P:top$rty A.gent
1228
l3ti:lld:i.i!.\g . Cad and Noise Abatemen:t: S1;i.per.viso:i:.
1278
Business systems Analyst I
Busi:t:nesli/ Systems Analyst I:C
1023
Businet!:$ Syii!teins Analyst  J::CI  •.•
1.02.1
Buyer I s Aide I
128\5
B'l.tye:r' Ill Ai.de J;X
1287
cemetecy Managaz-

Claims and :tnsurance Mana,ger
1816
coi1eotions Manager
1344
.Comm.unity :oeve1bpment Coo:cdirrn.t:o:r
13)50
commurd..ty	oevelopmep,,t   specialist  :i:
1351
Comm'Ul1ity bevelopme1'l.t. Bp,ec:i;a,list: I:t
1352
conum.i:nity Dev•eJ.op!ltemt $pec:tal.ist:.. IlI
1.353
Communit:ypeveloJ?rnent Speaia.1.illlt IV

compliance and Metering Mru1ager
1805
Cu/;ltomer I1t:eo:cmat:ton and l:\il,lit1.g Ma:riage:t'
1795







Clgtssifleg Servl¢e Claa.ses .:1nd Standard Rates
Stanpard
.B. @te N.  i.li.ht2.r.u:



:oaputy Noise Ab t;ern, nt o:r.f:i.oet

Dev lopment Pr:ojeot; Maxia.ge:r: I
13..97
us
:oevelopl"!\ent J?:i=oj eot. Mana.i;rer :i::t
11.135
l;l ve;J.opment »z:oj eot M c1.gs:.1: :t;.i:;i:
:1,:1,8!3';
isptite Resolution Off.icier
14:L!'i:
';ljk;,Qn.omioit:
l424
Emplo'y-i:.ie ASli>iiiitanoe Cotinaelo:r
1406
Employ a	sii;stant;ie l?,:i;q.g:ram tl.(a a,g:er
14,,;.l
mploy,cie Benef:l.t.s Mmix1:lJi;t;,;-a1;;9:r
;1.4;u;
Erop;J.oy¢e Jll :r,i,e:e;l;te 1;1peo:i,iali:1:1t I.
1:IJ.17
:ii::mployee :El n¢f;Lts Sp§.loi l!sti :tI
\iA.07
Fitness $;peo:Lal:l;,J:t
l.20.l.
'l1'lEf-e.t. Pa:r:t1;1 auy1;1r
i.250
Fl:e t P1;t:rts Buyer Si:lJ;ie:rvis.or ,.,
1249
:tpfo:rmatiq:q Sys em1:1 A.dnd.:n: stratqr
1243
:rnfO:t1jlati9:p; Systeliitll .A:na.lyst; :t
1151
:Ctl.:l;Q:r;ml?).tio:n systi::imJS • AUa.lyst :i:::i:
1348
Ii;tt;c;,:ri'riat .ei:p, $y tem$ AriaJ.yst :t:rJ;
134'9
I:nfi':.irjt\1:1.ti,ol:'l. Syst ms Ahdyst IV

:i;'#.ti;,z,ii:ul:t- ori iilistems ..llla'li.a,ge:r. ·.

::Cnf◊:r.ntati.on sys.terns. Teohriioia.n
:1401.
Junio.r )il:i:•ope:i::t;y Ag ri:t
·is64
Lakes P;rog:ram Manag§ir

l?m:ri:i;le9al

.t,ite'J;'.;i.oy Prog:rc:l.TI\ 11,dminist:ril,to;i:­
1757
M!:!.nagenierit 'rtdnee
11'08'





Standat'd
.Rat§ Nµmber
Classified Service .Glasses and Standard Rates



Noise Abatement o:E:Eioer
organizational Effecrl;.ive:ri.ess Speaial:Lst; :i: O:t'tfruJ.:l.za.tional Ji:ffeotive:m.ess S:r;iecialiat n org!;'lj;J,batio:nal Effeotive:n.ess Speoialist I:CI
O:r.ganbat:Lonal E:E:f.e.ot:Lve:n.ess Su:i;>e:t."V,:i,sor
:r?eraonnei .tl.ssiata:nt I
Jilerscitml;ll .Assistant II
Police l?roperty and Records Administrator Prindipe,l Paralegal
J?rinc;,:lpa:). l?:ro<;nlrement Sp aial:J.,st P:r.ocn.i.remfi:lnt .Speoiali.s.t Produrement Trainee
J?z•ope:rty Agent
        ◦ :f?ublio Art   Program Admini,ttpai,to:r
Publio In:!;ormatlion. Off.icier
Pl.ti.te Attalyst
Reoyoi:i.ng Program Manager.
'.Reoydli:n.g s:i;ied:talist :t
:R,eoyol;Lng Spedal.ist :CI Il,e_oyoLJ..ng Specialist III Reh.a.bil:l. tation _coo:r.d:irisito:r. Sate1ty a.nd.. ?Jra.inix}g Ma:na.ger Safety • Officer
sen:i.or.:audget Peveiopme:nt An lyst
Senior Department Human :R.esou:roes Analyst
/:lertj,or Paralegal

16.3.1

1613
l6:L4

16l2
1615
1651
;1.66i 169!3
1147
1'783
1282
1283

1756

1769
1777
1793
1556
1559
1558
1561
18:tl 19n 1823
196.6

1365

1822



.Classified Se.rvloe Gl sses and Standard Rates
Standard •
,Rgte urob r


Senio:i:- Mana ement .Andyst	:tl06.
Sen:l.o:i: Pez-sottlle;t At11;1.lys.t	:j;650
Senior P.:rocu:rement speQ:l;p1.1:l.$t;:	J;85O
S nic:ir l?l,tl;>'.1..±q. :r:nfo;i:miation qfil::i.qer	1871
st iii.um/Field Manager	1874
SupaTTisfog cia4m1;r Rep:relil ri;tat:.i.v	1s,$1
SU}i>ervising l:iuds'et t>evelopme1tt An.alyst:. •	19  7
Sµl?e:i;y;l,£!).:l,ng :Oepo1.:rtl'l1ent Human ' e1;1.ot1:r E;it.;1 Arl, lyst	1361>
S1,1.pei'vis:i.ng :Woonomist:	l.923
Superv:is:lng  n g m p.t Aµ.alyst	l.9:1.7
Supe:i::vis:l.nfiJ Pers¢:Aµel ,lwalyst·	1927
Supe:tvisil.'i9' P:topert:t Asi.e11:t	1 2.Sl
,.
Su!)e;c,vis:tng l?µblio :r.nforma.tion ,office	1940
Sttt, :cviiili;ng  eoy:t:1:Ung Speaia,li,st	:J;.i;i57
systetUS Admiriistx-ator :r	1026
Systems Adm:lnbt,:ator ;i;:i,;	;to.as
@:tst.emei Aclminist:r.ato:r J;IX	';1,0;34
Traini:nl;J: Supe:rvtaor	'l.971
v:l. tim l;le;rv,iqe.s :OQq:r<,t:Lnator ·	:i,9a3
.MARIN!ll SAFll1ff

l'.iake Ra.:r.tgfiir
tJ if egua;:.d :t I.dfi3i;TU&td II
L:!.fegua.;rd; IIJ:
Ues:ua:rd Se:tgeanl::
Mau.r ne s.a,:f; ty Cffl.:r;>ba.iti

.1S + '1693 (1,6◊:3 150.2
:1587






Standard
B te Num,
Classifjed Service Glasses and Standard Rates


Marine Safety Lieutenant
Ra,nger /Di:ver: :c
Ranc;.:re:i::'/D:Lver :r.:c
·Ranger/Diver su.pe:i:v;j..so:r
1$89

1398
13.9.9


:P.l'!lU: MA;t:N'l'mi,qANc:m
Golf cou:rse Superintendent

Greeiiskeepet Supervisor (';!rounds Maintenance Manager Grouncjs Mai:ti.tenc1,noe S!-Wery"isor
Grounds Maintenance Wol:'ke:r I Grounds Ma;i.ntenanoe, Wbrke:c II Gro:unds l\taintenanee.wo:rker u;c· Ho:rt dµlturist
I:rrif)"ation peoialiat

Lead Cem¢:i .E?ry. Gl;'.ovnd1:1)1:eiep1;1:i;
'.Nurs,e:iy Ga:r.den.e:t·
.	.
Nursery super·<.dso:r J?estio:l.de Appl:!.oat.or l?est;i.cide SupervJsor
Se i.o:r Stadium G:tom1.dskeeper Staditun Glroundskeeper
Stad um Turf Mmnage:t;'
T:iree Maintenali.oe C:i:'ewleader Tree Ma:lntenanoe Superviscir


l.509

14e2
1483

:1642
:t.470

ll;l,67

l 6S
1.469

1514
1508
l!:i68

1627
162.8
);6'44

164$ l;89:S 1894
18.92

tL968
1970


Clasi,ified Service Cla.ases anµ Standard Ra.t<as
Stan.d1:1rd
Rate N!Jrnker


Ttee T:rin:imei'	].96'9



s1;1:Lstant l?lcinp.s£
Asso.CJiata Plai;l.tier
·un:t.o:r Pl :r. P;arw:t;:g.g iieohniotan :c l?;LannJ..:ni 'l'eotJP.:l.o:l.. II
J?1ann.:i.ns: 'i'.$<:il;);n.ioian .:x:u
.Se:niox- i?larm .:r
Sel;)Jo:r   Zol'li:rtsr Invest:l!ifato:r.
    • zcmi:ng :c:o:vest:!.gat;.or I
Zon:l.i:1,g :r.nvesti9.ato:r Il
1175
122'7
J;;jµ

1(;1$':3
1664
,, ,11,6'6',;i
!872

'··:'j"i

;p.197
1998




Assi1;1t t wastewate:r l?lax;i.t operator Assistant wate; Jiilarit bt>e:rato:r .. '.P.lanj:: Ol)ei'a.tol:" '.liiai ee
Sepio:,i: Wa@t:.ewate:r Opetatio:p.s l;JU',G>;e:tv.:Lso:r
SC;J:o:l.qtt" Wa;1;1te:wattliz- P;J.;;mt: Opez-atot
e.nior wa.t :i: O e;:a.t;ion ,S J?El :v:Lsor Ws:stewat:,er Op<;1r.i\:: onill • t:upe:rv:d.sc;:i; wa:stewah3;.".l?lan:t;. Operc1<:toX'
Wastewate:r Treat;m t1,t; i,lupe:ri:cJ:teridE!nt
, Water Ope:rf,ttions Su:r;,e:rvisor
Water l?larit Qperq1.to:r:
W?tter :P:foduotio:n S't;ip dnteride;n:b
1206
:tioci
;!,673
1888
1l3A,
198,7
',  1887

;l.8 0
1sil3 ••
1SHl(i
1988

:tJ384



Classified Servic0 Classes and Standi;wd Rates

Standard
"'"'t""!!:!"-- -








l?o:Lice Chie:f: • •








Standard
,Rat<:a,J;,turnb;er
Classified S1 rvl a Classes nd Stand rd' Rates


.I?.olioe o£fioer :r.:r:
J?.ol:Lo (?ffioer XI±
:l?o'.!;ice lleo:i:;:i;l,;lt

Police  Sf?:rge.1. ;.
J?QJ:::Loe se:rv:l.cie Ofi;;toex :r:
X>.91 .cie. se*v-:toe Q;l;f.:l.qer :q:r
supetv';i,s:Lng Adi:l.d.emy Inst tu.otot
$upervis ng Oai,-Ib TeoI,11i94'iµ1
Supe:i:v-ising Crime Sden Sp.ecialis.t.
/;')µpe:rv:J:s. ng· b:i;-.imir,,,a,:L:!,st;
S'U'.l;>e:i::":9'i$:l.n$. Latent  .E':ri:n.t 'llJ;x;ami:ner


:a:l,ndecy ·wo:i::ker i
J3:J;ncl.!'alry- w9rker II
Bin\;l.ery worke;i;-.,III
\
:mlecififo1i:lc J?ublisl:dtig Spl:;'lc:i.aHst
l,i tb.og:,rapllic W ohr).iaian
Ofbet Press o i;irator
Offset Press supe!t'iri1;Joi
l?rin Shop·sµpex-visc:ir
'


16'SHi
1697 l,696' i392
137?.
1!':141.
1930
1018
;as6.
10U




1 60
126.l

1262

1583
15!:)S:

Ui3
1765.

1736

1868


t JllOR,EA'l'ION


Ar$$. Ma:rl.ager  I
Area Ma'b.,a t  II


1130 l;!.31









Standard
Bat(:)J .Y.!!i.ber

Classifiecl Service Class s and Standard Rates


Assista t Reo eation Center Director
:o:Lst:r.iot Ma:nag·e:i:
Golf course Manager Golf starter
    • olf Sta:rte;i;- ,$µperviso:t'
l? rll: Ranger Aide
.Par1i:. RaJiger

Pool Guard t Pool Guard II Recreation Aide
J:1,eo:1:'eation center Di:reotor I Recreation Center Ptrector :n: RecrMtion Ceriter Direot.or :tn
Recreation Lel:1lde:r. :C . Recreation Leader II Rec:J:<eation SpeciiaJ,!st Senior l?.a:rk Rai:.1$J'er
Supe:i:v .sing Recreation Specialist
swinmling l?ool .Manager :i: Sw:tnuniµg l?ool Manager II Swimmiixg Pool Manager ±II
1l92
:l.418 1798 l48Q
1481

1:t,76'

16:34,

1667
1.936
1794
;1,ar;3

1796
1735

1S(i5

1531
1797
182:t ,.

.193:t.•

1905
1906












'i	I
I




8tahd rd
aa- e NUl}lP: 
Cl s$ifi(:l(j Service·Olaa f:.!S and :Standard Rates


i$E:3::t.L;E:D 'J.'ltl).t)ES
App:tentice



Building Mainteria.11.oe supervisor
9arpe:n,te:r
car.t?e-nter su ei'.visci:i:'. C<:llll.G;i;it li'ini her cement Gh.i.n OJ?efato:i:
oornmtu:J,i¢,atiq;p:s • Te'ohnioian.

Salary ;itange wiU.be establ,ii::ihe<;'l al!i ei. p/a:i:'('.)elitage of j'P" ti/te:p o:E th	ai:i ;qp:ria.te jottni.!;1:Y, 112.rv: l ol.a.ss
12'73




l,?9

1498
1426
Coinmunioatii;ins. 'l'echt1ioian sups:rv;Li;iol:'
donstruotion.Est;tmato:t: Etleotriciiari       Eleot:r:iqian S:upe,:t'Vif!)or lllledti.i::inii::is !Jtechn:i.o:Lan
lllie.9t:t:on;l,q@ '.l'egl'µliq:l,an. $1,1perv:Lsor
:a:eatihg T1acbn;<;;1i1:1r;i.
    • lieat:l±\g1 Vi;i:nt;l.latii1!:;f I    axid A:L:r
Qq:qd,:L .:LQniµ.$' •Sup rvi1;10:r
..
:Crist rrientation and Control: '.'C'eohnician
:rn,1;1t:i;-'l;Ul)e 1tai;:i9r;r. a.i'.1,d Oontr9J,, S'llJrietv'iso:r
Lo sm:Lth

l?ai:ritet Si.ipervisor
:t;ilan,t. Prooess Control Eleot:rioi.an
li'lant: J?ro,<::ie,gi{'! ,do:nt:ro;J, su:pe:rviso.:r
1427
1.601

1428
14.3;1,
144S
1444,
isio
1$1:l.

15 3
.15.22

1597.

16'0.S
,1635

l.637
:J..066
i6 a








Classified Service Classes and Standard Rates

Standard Rate Number









I'
    • 1
I





dlasslUed·Service Classes and Standard ·Rates

St1;1ndard f{ate Nymber


STORJ1lKElllP:tNG


J?olice lil:rope:i:'l::y a:i: d lilvideMe Clez:k. J?:rop@:i;-t:.y and E;vicle,n;c:1e tiuJ?ervisor

1719
190.0
s.tock .Clerk Stoiek;eeper I f;ltt1l.7!ll eepe:r :i:: :
storekeeper ;ci:c
S pi- foi o e:r tions $upezy.;i.i;iq;I'.'
senior l?rope:i:;ty i:md Evi.c:ieM(? $u ew:lso:i:
.181),9,

190:?
J90
1901

,:J,5.3J
190.4










EXR:X:S J:T O .















ia::m CITY Q:V sm DIEGO
WCLASSIFitD SER lCE
CLASSI:I!':tCAT±ONS Am)	STANDAlID SALA.RY lU.TES

EXHIBIT C
Jl:J'Li 1,	2010
.(Revised Ap:r:tl 12, 2010)







c--::,
-
.::.ti

•"•'
ft.l
- -	(!")
N
:i!·
--
.i..-
Q
rn
.p<1.
t;:J

Page fof P
UNCLASSIFIED. SERVICE
.',      '"




,    ...            ,.,.,.         .	. ..   ,.......  j     ...	,...t      ;  ..    ,	..	.

Exeoutlye V;


 al,ary Rate..205 /Minimµm· apd.Maxjroum Monthly	$ 6;105;00	.• $ 24,383.00 BHNeekly	$ 2,8,0$.00	.. $ 11,21520
Hourly	$	35.10	$	140;19

2141	City Manager (Chief Operating. Officer) (UC)
-:2G-Q-4.........--C~lt -A1  tt<i>	 •	.	•	•	••
•2106	Assl taritClty Attorney (UC)	.	.	. ....	. .
2111	Assistant City Manager (Assistant Cbl fOperatlngOfficer) (UC}	.
2t27	Assist ntto the City Manager(Assistant to the Chief Operating Officer) (UC)
.2.1 CJ	Retirement Ac/..mitilstrator (QC)	•

Executive IV	1:1I:a1:.Y'Rate--2b41lMioimum and Ma?{imurn
·· M'
onto1·y
$.,.. '4";.94,'7" :oo.,,
;..· .$'
1a,13.9..  00
Bl we.ekly	$ 2,275.20	.. $	8,619.20
Hot,trly	$  "•	28.44	-  $	107..74
2153	Assil:lta·ntfq the Qlty M hager (Deputy Chi.ef Op.eratfng Officer) (UC)
213d	f.;3uclget0ffloer(Chief Finari.qit:il Offi0!9t) (UG)	.	.. 2112	Bus.iness Center Manager (UC) (Assistant Oepµ:ty .Qhlef ,Qp$rating Off19et)
2109	City Auditor (UCJ ;	... ..	•	,, ,;,,:,,	•	• ••••••,•••
2132	D p rtmentDiredtor {tJO)
2131	Development Servioaa Dlrector.(UC)
2147	$nglneerlng antl.· Capital ProJects Qlrector{UC) 2192	Envlronm€.li1lal. Services Director (UQ)	• 215{?	Sxe9uthie As$J$hint Police Chief {UC)
2160	Fire Chief (UC)
2142		IndepenaeritBudg(3t•Anaiy t (WC)· 2..267	Jvle.tropolitan We\ tew teir Director (UC) 2179	P rk nct R creation Director (UC.) 2172	il=>lanrilng :Director (UC)
2173,	,Police OMi f(UC)	.
2194	• Puplic Ut111ti:es Dlreyqtc;,.r (lJG)
•••	•	••
21i:5•9	Transportation Director (UC)

Page 2 of B

.[xecutiveJH
Salary Rate,,2030/Minimum and Maximum
. Monthly    $ 2i664.00 •• ·  $14,547.00 Bl wetkly $ 1,220.80 - $ 6,691.20 Hourly	$ 1s·.2a - $ 83.64

2181
Asaistant·oepartm nt Director (UC)
2105
Assistant DevelopmenfServices Dlrector{UC}
2123
Assistant Environmental Services Director (UC}•
2115
Assistant F.inanclal Management Director (UC)
2164
Assistant Fire Chief (UC)
2276
Assjatant Metropolitt:ln Wastewater Director.(UO)
2114
Assistant Planning Dlreotqr (UC)
21·18
A slstant Transportation Director (UC)
2255
City Architect (UC)
2140
City Librarian (UC).
2134
Neighbo.rhood Code Compliance Director (UC)
2176
Purchasing Agent (UC)
2177
Real Estate Ass1;3ts Director (UC)
2157
Risk Management Director (UC)
1190
Treasurer (UG)


Executive II		Salaty Rate 2020/Minimum and.Maximum Monthly	•	$ 2,207.00	.. $ 13.,41f5.O0 Bi-weekly		$· 1,015,20		$	6;17.0.40
Hourly	$	12.69	$	77.13






2182





Manager (UC)
Principal Assistant to City Attorney (UC)







Executive I

    •   K rr.	0$1o	m a_nd$	,	o

SI-weekly
$	181.60
.. -$	4;534..40
Hourly •
$	Q:n
- $	56.68

2117	Assistarit to the .E:hgih erltig iind Capital Projects Direqtor (l.:JQ) •
215·0	Asslstantto theNeighborhoq<l C9de Cor\ipllance Director (UC)
21.2.5	Assistant to the Park and•Recreation Director (UC)
2.122	A.sslstantto the Water D(')partm,ehtOir ctor(UC)



MANAGERlA,L
Classification §n  Plas: Number
Page 4 of 8

M.. nagerial A

§f.llary R t§-2070/Mir;imum and Maximum Monthly	$  1;407,00	.	$	8-,823..00
BJ..weekly •	$	641.2b	.. ·$	4,058.40
Hourly	$	8;09	- $	50.73
2205	Confidential Secretary to City Attorney (UC)
2207	Confidential Secretary to City	.	.
Mam:1 er (Confldentlal Secretary to Chief Operating Offloer) (UC) 2209	Confldentlal Secretary to Police Chi.ef (UC)
2148	Secretary to Labor Relations (UC)






22.60
2256
                                      Sala[}! Rate 2f.r73/Mjnimum...§ind Maximum. Monthly	$ 1,fJ24.0b •		$ 11,531.00 B! weekly	$	884,80		$	5,304.00 Hourly	$ •		11.oe	- $	66.30
.. Assistant Deputy i;>!rector (UC).
A sistant Investment Officer (UC)	.















2243
2232













Resource DevelopmentOfflcer (UC).	.
Regional Urban Information Systems Administrator (lJC)


Pa.ge 5 of.a

MariagerlalC
SalaJ¥:Rat..2077LMlriJmum and M xrmum .·
Monthly	$	,927,.00	.. $ 14,445.00
Bi-weekly •	,$ 1,806.40	.. $ 6,644;00
Hourly	•	$	• 22.s·a.	$	83.os

2283
22313.
2245:
Assistant Golf Operations Manager (UC) Asslst ht Police Chief (UCJ	,,, A§$iStE1nt Sta<:ll m M ma.ger.(UG)





2247
2145
2218
2203
2220
2214
2253
.2252
2237
2219
2225
2268
2216
2269
iiao.
2248
228.4'
2240
2246
Budget Services Mant:1ger .(UC) Chief Aooou11tanf(UC) •
CityPll:ltiner(UC).
Community P.evelopmeht: Administrator (UC) Crime Labor1;:1t9ryMe.ioager (UC). •   •• Deputy Director (UC)..
Qeputy Pjraotor, SlectioJi$ :an.d Reebrd$ M nagefnent (UC) IDepU:ty Dlreytor, Le9islatJv13 Services (UQ)	•
Deputy Fire Chief (UC)	• Oeiputy Libr ry Plre.ctor, (UP)' Deputy Planning Dlrec\or (UC) Exe9utiy19 OirectQt.(UG) Facillt:{M$h?iger (LIO)=··••
. Labor elatlons Manager.(UC)
Lifeguard Oh.i' f .(UQ) .	••	.
    • Orgariizatlon Effectlven.ess Program Manager (lJO)
Perforri)aric A«dit Manager' (VCJ	•
PQlipe Qommaxider ( O) • •	..
Police Administrative $(1,lrylces: Dir otor (UC}.
2is4
2270
2249.
2 71
2426
-Principal Planner, (UC•)	•• Progta111 M li  gef (U,O) Youth·servlces Adminl.$trator (UC)
.Revenue programs Manag.er (UQ}
Zoning AdmH1istratof(l)C)•






PROFESSIONAL LEGAL
Classification and Ctass Number




§:.ru§ry Rate-2060/MJr)lmumand Maximum
.Page 6 of 8
Monthly	$ 1,489.OD	$ 17,076.00
Bl weekly	$	684.80	$: 7, 54.40
Hourly	$	8,56	M	$	98.18

2196
Assistant Retirement Ge.l"leral Coun$el
(UC)
2224
Associate Counsel (UC)
•
2151
Deputy City Attorney (UC)

2197
General Counsel (UC)

    • 2195
Retirement G'eneral Counsel (UC)


OTHER MISCELLANEOUS EXECUTIVE ANO MANAGERIAL
Cl§sslfication and Class.N,umber

!,vliscellaneous A
.&alary Rate 2055/Mhihrium,and Maximum
· Monthly		$		2,901.00 .: $ 1t328.00· Bi weekly		$	• 1,334.40 . $ . 7,969.60 Hourly	. $		•	16.68 ·. $	99;e2

2285 Assistant City lu;ditor (UC)
2107 Assistant Comptroller (UC)
2113 Assistant Personnel Director (UC)
2119 Assistant Retirement Administrator (UQ)
2458•   ·Binatlonal Affelt$ Officer (UC)
2138 City Clerk(UC)
21$7 Comptroller (UC}
2156 Executive Services Director (UG) 216'.7 Governmental Relations Director (UC) 2241 Investment Officer (lJC)	••
        217.1 Personnel Director (UC) •	•
 	lhistrate-	) MOVED TO EXECUTIVl: V
:2•1G9 Clty;A. teF UC) MOVED TO J:XSCUTIVE IV


            ▪ Miscellaneous B		aJ§lY Rate-2Ql /,Minimurn. and Maximum Monthly	•• $ 2,122.00		$ 12,392.Q0 Bl weekly		$	976.00		$	5,700,00 Hourly		$		12.20	- $		71.26

2108 Assistant City Clerk (UC)
2faa AsslstantExecutiye Services Director (UC)
218.3 Assistant Governmental Relations Director (UC) 2120 Asslstantto Mayor (UC)


22q0. P.eputy P¢rsonn I Dlr ctor {UC). .
.2217 Financial. Operations Manager,.(UQ)
2174 Prlhojpijl Assietantto Mayor(UC).
.	.
Ml,sceUane. .o, o J1'   ,
.S1alap(J!tate 2035/Mini,mum anq Maxirnuro.
Monthly	$ 1,708.00	- $ 12;486.Q0
Bi.-weekly	$	785..eo	- $	o,743.?0
Hourly	$	9.8	-.  $•	7,1;i.9

2133 Council Assistant (Prihclpal Assistant) (UC)

MisaelJarieous D
    • §.ala!)sRate 2.025/Minimum .and Maximum
,Monthly ·•. $ 1,616.00 .. $ 12;697.00 a._1..;w$ekl.Y $ • 74?..20 p	$ 5;84Q;,OQ Hourly $ 9.2Q· .. $ 73.0Q..

2259 • AssistantBinatlonal Aff@lrs 0.ffiqer (UC')
2 00 A$.s.Jstarit for Qornm1,.1hlty Qutre wh (UC)
214.3 Budget(l...egl.slatlveAhaly t I (WQ)· 4144' Budget/ gl,sl tive Analyst II (UC) 22.1.0, ¢ouncll Cqmmlttee Cons4lt1q6t:{UC) 2213 Council Representative H(UC)
:2158 1 quet.l Employment lnve$tigation$ M hage.r (UC)
.2267 ' rants Qoordinl:)tqr (LIC) . .. .	• • 2178 Mayor Representative. U (UC)
222§: P,rihoip I Account ryt (PC) .
2175 -	-1 .f (fJrform,.nc :Aud!tor (UC)
    • 2223 $ehiof Councff Committee Consultant (UC)	•



Mlsc lianeous §
	
S.alaiy Rate 201stMihimum ahd Maximum
MOnthW	• $. 1,•39:1.00	...,$' a,ree:oo
SJ-weekly	$·	640:b.d	- $	4P32,QO Hourly	$		e.oo " $	50.40
2251 Commltte.C? Oon$ultants Saoretary,(UC) 2206 Conficf_enti J se.pretary to pity CoUQcil(lJC) 220$ Confideritlal Secretary to Mayor (UQ).
2211 Council Representatlvifl (.UC) •	• •
2212 Council Repre$entatlve -fl (UC)
21ef5 M yor Representative I (UC)







.MJ!cellanee>y;; E	Salary Rate-2014/Mlnlmum and Maximum Monthly	$ 4,496.00	- $	Bi766;0o
Pag 8 of 8


2274 Medical Review Officer (UC)
Bi-weekly	$ 2,068'.00	- $	4,032.00
Hourly	$	25.:85	- ·	50.40

INTERNS
Salar¥.,B.Ue/Mlnlmum ,art':i..,M JmLim
effective 711/09

2185
Senior Legal lnterri.(UC)
{2185)Monthly	$ 3,969,00	-	$ 4,821.0d
Bi..weekly	$ 1,825.60	$ 2,217.60
Hourly	$	22.82	..	$	27.72



















sr..weekly	 $  •••.933.60 HoLirly	$	11.67
$ 1.,123.20
$	14.04

2139	Police Intern (UC)

(2139)M,onthly	$ 2,023.00 Bl-weekly	$	930.40 • Hourly·	$		11.63
ffl	$ 2,440.00
$ 1f 122.40
..	$	14.03

2188	Student Intern (UC)
(2188)Monthly	$ 1,557.00	..	$ 1,866.00
Bi weekly	$	716.00	$	858.40
Hourly	$	6,95	.,	$	10.73
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the undersigned agree to submit this tentative Memorandum of Understanding, effective July 1, 2015 - June 30, 2020, to their respective constituents for approval.

Date:	_

SAN DIEGO POLICE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
CITY OF SAN DIEGO (OFFICE OF THE MAYOR)


(Signature on file, available upon request)
Bradley M. Fields, Lead Negotiator
(Signature on file, available upon request)
Timothy L. Davis, Lead Negotiator


(Signature on file, available upon request)
Brian R. Marvel, President
(Signature on file, available upon request) Judy von Kalinowski, Human Resources Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Jeffery T. Jordon, Vice President
(Signature on file, available upon request) Karen DeCrescenzo, Senior Human Resources Officer


(Signature on file, available upon request)
Tom Bostedt, Secretary
(Signature on file, available upon request)
Shelley Zimmerman, Chief of Police

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Terry Hoskins, Director
(Signature on file, available upon request) Sarah Creighton, Assistant Chief of Police

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Mike Fender, Director
(Signature on file, available upon request) Estella Montoya, Risk Management Deputy Director

(Signature on file, available upon request)
Michael Pidgeon, Director


(Signature on file, available upon request)
Paul Paxton, Director


(Signature on file, available upon request)
Ed LaValle, Director


(Signature on file, available upon request)
Jack Schaeffer, Director
For the City of San Diego, I HEREBY APPROVE the form and legality of the foregoing Agreement this  	day of  	,2015.

TIMOTHY L. DAVIS:

By:
TIMOTHY L. DAVIS, ESQ.,
BURKE, WILLIAMS & SORENSEN, LLP

_(Signature on File -Available Upon Request)_
SIGNED
DATE  	
